Spectrin βV adaptive mutations and changes in
subcellular location correlate with emergence
of hair cell electromotility in mammalians
Matteo Cortesea,b,c,1, Samantha Papala,b,c,1, Francisco Pisciottanod,1, Ana Belén Elgoyhend,e, Jean-Pierre Hardelina,b,c,
Christine Petita,b,c,f, Lucia Florencia Franchinid,2,3, and Aziz El-Amraouia,b,c,2,3
a
Génétique et Physiologie de l’Audition, Institut Pasteur, F-75015 Paris, France; b
Unité Mixte de Recherche, UMRS 1120, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale (INSERM), F-75013 Paris, France; c
Complexité du vivant, UPMC Université Paris 06, Sorbonne Universités, F-75005 Paris, France; d
Instituto de Investigaciones en Ingeniería Genética y Biología Molecular “Dr. Héctor N. Torres” (INGEBI), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y
Técnicas (CONICET), C1428ADN Buenos Aires, Argentina; e
Instituto de Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, C1121ABG Buenos
Aires, Argentina; and f
Collège de France, F-75005 Paris, France
Edited by William E. Brownell, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, and accepted by Editorial Board Member Jeremy Nathans January 11, 2017 (received
for review November 17, 2016)
The remarkable hearing capacities of mammals arise from various
evolutionary innovations. These include the cochlear outer hair
cells and their singular feature, somatic electromotility, i.e., the
ability of their cylindrical cell body to shorten and elongate upon
cell depolarization and hyperpolarization, respectively. To shed
light on the processes underlying the emergence of electromotility, we focused on the βV giant spectrin, a major component of the
outer hair cells’ cortical cytoskeleton. We identified strong signatures of adaptive evolution at multiple sites along the spectrin-βV
amino acid sequence in the lineage leading to mammals, together
with substantial differences in the subcellular location of this protein between the frog and the mouse inner ear hair cells. In frog
hair cells, spectrin βV was invariably detected near the apical junctional complex and above the cuticular plate, a dense F-actin meshwork located underneath the apical plasma membrane. In the
mouse, the protein had a broad punctate cytoplasmic distribution
in the vestibular hair cells, whereas it was detected in the entire
lateral wall of cochlear outer hair cells and had an intermediary
distribution (both cytoplasmic and cortical, but restricted to the
cell apical region) in cochlear inner hair cells. Our results support
a scenario where the singular organization of the outer hair cells’
cortical cytoskeleton may have emerged from molecular networks
initially involved in membrane trafficking, which were present
near the apical junctional complex in the hair cells of mammalian
ancestors and would have subsequently expanded to the entire
lateral wall in outer hair cells.
unconventional spectrins | inner ear | F-actin cytoskeleton | cortical
lattice | phylogenetics
The response of the mammalian auditory organ (cochlea) to
acoustic stimuli in an extended frequency range (including
high frequencies) has remarkable properties including very high
sensitivity and exquisitely sharp tuning (1–3). These properties
are the consequence of an evolutionary process that involved
major morphological and functional changes. One of them is the
emergence, in the cochlea, of the outer hair cells, a unique type
of specialized sensory cells that display somatic electromotility,
i.e., they undergo periodic length changes in response to the oscillation of their membrane potential evoked by the sound wave
(they shorten upon depolarization and elongate upon hyperpolarization) (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 A–C). This process has endowed
the mammalian auditory organ with a singular mechanism of
spectral analysis of the acoustic stimulus through frequencyselective mechanical amplification (1–3), whereas spectral analysis
in other vertebrates (fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds) primarily relies on electrical tuning of the hair cells (4, 5).
An intriguing question is how the emergence of somatic
electromotility is related with the evolution of individual proteins
involved in this process. The electromotility of outer hair cells
critically depends on the presence, in their lateral plasma
membrane, of prestin (SLC26A5), a member of the solute carrier
family, which undergoes conformational changes driven by the
receptor potential of these cells (2, 6, 7). Prestin orthologs have
been identified in all vertebrate and invertebrate species examined (8, 9), but distinct cell distributions and functional properties have been reported for nonmammalian and mammalian
prestins (9–12), together with amino acid sequence signatures of
an adaptive evolution in the mammalian lineage (8, 13). The
electromotility of outer hair cells also relies on the unique trilaminate structure of their cylindrical lateral wall, which consists
of the plasma membrane (containing millions of packed prestin
molecules), the cortical lattice, and an innermost membranous
apparatus forming the subsurface cisternae (1, 2, 7, 14). The
cortical lattice mainly consists of circumferential actin filaments
cross-linked by longitudinal spectrin filaments (1, 2, 7). These are
large rod-like flexible components of the cytoskeleton made of
two protein subunits, α and β, aligned side by side to form
Significance
The mammalian auditory organ harbors a subpopulation of
sensory hair cells that alternately shorten and elongate in response to sound stimuli. This singular feature, called somatic
electromotility, is associated with the presence of a flexible
cortical network of F-actin and spectrin βV, a large unconventional β-spectrin. We show that adaptive mutations of
spectrin-βV occurred in the mammalian lineage and were accompanied with substantial changes in the protein distribution
within inner ear hair cells. This study illustrates how a comparison of the subcellular locations of a protein between
nonmammalian and mammalian vertebrates in a given cell
type, combined with branch-site model analysis of the protein
family in silico, can shed light on a major mammalian
structural/functional innovation.
Author contributions: L.F.F. and A.E.-A. designed research; M.C., S.P., F.P., L.F.F., and
A.E.-A. performed research; A.B.E. and C.P. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; M.C.,
S.P., F.P., L.F.F., and A.E.-A. analyzed data; and J.-P.H., L.F.F., and A.E.-A. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. W.E.B. is a Guest Editor invited by the Editorial
Board.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1
M.C., S.P., and F.P. contributed equally to this work.
2
L.F.F. and A.E.-A. contributed equally to this work.
3
To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: aziz.el-amraoui@pasteur.fr or
franchini@dna.uba.ar.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1618778114/-/DCSupplemental.
2054–2059 | PNAS | February 21, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 8 www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1618778114
heterodimers (SI Appendix, Fig. S1D), which in turn can form
oligomers through head-to-head interactions. In mammals, there
are two different α isoforms (αI and αII), four conventional β isoforms (βI, βII, βIII, and βIV), and one nonconventional β isoform
(βV) almost twice as long as conventional β isoforms (15, 16) (SI
Appendix, Fig. S2). We have previously reported that the cortical
lattice of outer hair cells mainly contains the αII and βV spectrin
subunits (17). We now report different subcellular distributions of
Fig. 1. Spectrins αII and βII in the frog and mouse
inner ear hair cells. (A–D) Frog (X. laevis). (A) Diagram of the amphibian inner ear, showing the sensory regions of the hearing organ (light green) and
of the five balance end organs (dark green). (B and
C) Side (B) and top (C) views of the utricular macula.
(D) Isolated vestibular hair cells (VHCs). In frog hair
cells, spectrins αII and βII are both detected in the cell
apical region, specifically, in the cuticular plate (CP)
and in the submembrane region of the apical junctional complex. In B and D, F-actin is stained in red by
TRITC–phalloidin. (E–G) Mouse. (E) Diagram of the
mammalian inner ear, showing the sensory epithelia
of the hearing organ (cochlea) and of the five balance end organs. (F) Side views of the anterior crista.
The VHCs can be identified by their myosin VIIa
immunostaining. As in frog hair cells, spectrins αII
and βII are detected mainly in the apical region of
VHCs. (G) In isolated VHC and cochlear outer hair cell
(OHC), spectrin αII (green) and spectrin βII (red) are
both detected in the CP. In the OHC, spectrin αII is
also present throughout the lateral wall. By contrast,
the αII immunostaining of the VHC lateral wall does
not cover the entire cell circumference (see diagrams). Bars, 5 μm.
Fig. 2. Distinct subcellular distributions of spectrin
βV in the frog and mouse hair cells. (A–C) Frog
(X. laevis). (A and B) In the vestibular hair cells (VHCs)
of a frog utricular macula, spectrin βV (green) is invariably detected both in the cuticular plate (CP) and
as an apical immunoreactive peripheral ring (arrowheads in A). The top views in B show spectrin βV
labeling just above and under (asterisk) the cuticular
plate. (C) At the CP apical surface, the spectrin βV
immunostaining forms a well-organized punctate
pattern, with seemingly uniformly spaced dots resembling lattice knots. (D–G) Mouse. (D and E) In the
VHCs of a mouse crista ampullaris, spectrin βV is
detected as a cytoplasmic punctate immunostaining
both in type I and type II VHCs, which can be differentiated by the tubulin βIII immunolabeling of
their afferent nerve fibers. Spectrin βV-immunoreactive puncta extend from the apical region near the
cuticular plate down to the supranuclear region of
the VHCs. (F and G) In the cochlea, spectrin βV is
present both in inner hair cells (IHCs) and outer hair
cells (OHCs). Note that the immunostaining of the
IHC lateral wall is restricted to the neck region (arrowheads), whereas the protein is detected in (and
restricted to) the entire lateral wall of OHCs, where
it contributes to the cortical lattice (see diagrams)
(F). (G) In the OHCs, the spectrin βV immunostaining
matches the distribution of the lateral plasma
membrane protein prestin (arrowheads). Bars, 5 μm.
Cortese et al. PNAS | February 21, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 8 | 2055
NEUROSCIENCE
spectrin βV in amphibian and mammalian inner ear hair cells, and
show how differences in protein- and lipid-binding profiles support
the distinct functions of conventional and nonconventional β spectrin isoforms in these cells. In addition, a phylogenetic analysis of
the spectrin–amino acid sequences in birds and mammals allowed
us to identify strong signatures of adaptive evolution in spectrins αII
and βV in the mammalian lineage, but not in the avian lineage.
Assuming that both spectrins were present in ancestral hair cells, we
suggest that special amino acid substitutions were evolutionarily
selected in the mammalian lineage to serve the emerging function
of sound stimulus mechanical amplification by the outer hair cells’
somatic electromotility.
Results and Discussion
Differential Distribution of Spectrin βV in Amphibian and Mammalian
Inner Ear Hair Cells. In the inner ear of vertebrates, the five vestibular end organs devoted to equilibration (utricle, saccule, and
three semicircular canals) have remained fairly constant during
evolution, whereas the auditory organ has undergone substantial
changes that ultimately led to the emergence of the mammalian
cochlea containing the electromotile outer hair cells (3, 18) (Fig.
1 A and E). We studied the distribution of spectrins in the frog
(Xenopus laevis) and mouse inner ears by immunofluorescence.
The typical distribution of spectrin βIII and spectrin βIV in brain
neuronal cell bodies and at axonal nodes of Ranvier, respectively, was found also in the vestibular and auditory neurons
(SI Appendix, Fig. S3 A and B and ref. 17). Spectrins αII, βII, and
βV were the only spectrin subunits detected in the inner ear hair
cells. In both species, spectrins αII and βII were detected mainly
as a prominent, diffuse, and uniform immunostaining in the most
apical region of vestibular and auditory hair cells, specifically, in
the cuticular plate, a dense transverse meshwork of actin filaments located under the apical surface of these cells (Fig. 1 A–G
and SI Appendix, Fig. S3). In contrast, the distribution of spectrin
βV was different between the frog and mouse hair cells and also
between the different hair cell types in the mouse. In all frog hair
cells, the bulk of spectrin βV immunostaining was invariably
detected underneath the apical plasma membrane, a distribution
reminiscent of those of the Drosophila, Caenorhabditis elegans,
and chicken nonconventional β spectrins, all of which are restricted to the apical region of epithelial cells (19–21). Detailed
analysis of the immunostaining by confocal microscopy revealed
a peripheral ring at the level of the apical junctional complex and
also a grid-like periodic pattern overlying the cuticular plate (Fig.
2 A and C), with immunostaining becoming more and more
diffuse as we went deeper into the cuticular plate (asterisk in Fig.
2B, SI Appendix, Fig. S4A). This may indicate a variation in the
local concentration of spectrin βV, because it has previously been
shown in neurons that the local concentration of β spectrin (βII
in that case) is critical for its organization into a periodic skeleton (22). In the mouse vestibular hair cells (type I and type II),
spectrin βV was detected as dispersed cytoplasmic immunoreactive puncta spreading from the cell apical region near the
cuticular plate down to the juxtanuclear region (Figs. 2 D and E
and SI Appendix, Fig. S4B). In the cochlea, the inner hair cells,
which are the genuine sensory cells that make synaptic contacts
with the afferent nerve fibers, displayed both a cytoplasmic
punctate staining and a submembrane staining in their neck region, whereas the outer hair cells only displayed the previously
reported submembrane staining of their entire lateral wall (Fig. 2
F and G and SI Appendix, Fig. S4C) (17).
Interaction of Spectrin βV with Membrane Phospholipids. Ankyrins
are adapter proteins located at the plasma membrane cytoplasmic surface, where they connect diverse cell-adhesion molecules
and ion transporters to the underlying cortical cytoskeleton (15,
16). All conventional spectrin β subunits interact directly,
through their spectrin repeats R14-R15, with the ZU5 domain of
ankyrins (15). We first showed that, as previously suggested (16,
23), nonconventional spectrin β subunits do not interact with
ankyrin. Unlike the R14-R15 fragment of the mouse spectrin βII
(amino acids 1694–1905) used as a positive control, the R14-R15
fragments of the human giant spectrin βV and Drosophila spectrin β-heavy (βH) indeed did not bind to ankyrin G in a pull-down
experiment. In the reciprocal experiment using the ZU5 domain
of ankyrin G and the full-length spectrin βV, we confirmed that
spectrin βV cannot bind to ZU5 (Fig. 3A).
Because nonconventional β spectrins do not bind to ankyrins,
how do they interact with cell membranes? The previously
reported direct interaction of the Drosophila spectrin βH C-terminal region, including the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain,
with membrane phospholipids (24) prompted us to investigate
the binding of an equivalent fragment of the human spectrin βV
(R29-Cter, amino acids 3317–3674), also including the PH domain, to membrane lipids in a lipid overlay assay. We found that
this fragment preferentially binds to phosphatidic acid, phosphatidylinositol 3-, 4-, or 5-monophosphate, phosphatidylinositol
3,5-bisphosphate, and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate
Fig. 3. Direct interaction of spectrin βV with membrane phospholipids, but not with ankyrin G.
(A) Spectrin-ankyrin interaction. (Left) Purified
His-tagged ankyrin G binds to a GST-tagged R14-R15
fragment of spectrin βII (GST-βII R14-R15), but not to
GST-tagged R14-R15 fragments of the human spectrin
βV (GST-βV R14-R15) or Drosophila spectrin βH (GST-βH
R14-R15). (Right) In the reciprocal experiment, the
GST-tagged ZU5 domain of ankyrin G (GST-ankyrin
ZU5) does not bind to the myc-tagged full-length
human spectrin βV. Homodimerization of spectrin βV
through its C-terminal region (R29-Cter) was used
as a positive control (17). (B) Spectrin-membrane
interaction. In a membrane lipid strip assay, the R29-
Cter fragment of spectrin βV, but not its actin-binding
domain (βV ABD), binds to phosphatidic acid (PA) and
phosphatidylinositol 4-monophosphate [PI(4)P]. In the
PIP strip assay, the βV R29-Cter peptide binds to PI(3)P,
PI(4)P, and PI(5)P, to PI(3,5)P2, and to PI(3,4,5)P3.
2056 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1618778114 Cortese et al.
(PIP3) (Fig. 3B), whereas the Drosophila spectrin βH preferentially
interacts with PI(4,5)P2 (24). This could partially account for the
targeting of these unconventional β spectrins to different cell regions
or compartments. By acting as docking sites on the cytosolic side of
membrane bilayers, phosphoinositides indeed play a substantial part
in the targeting code (25). In epithelial cell lines such as MDCK
cells, PIP3 is found in the basolateral plasma membrane and is excluded from the apical membrane, which contains large amounts of
PI(4,5)P2. In addition, PIP3 is present in early endosomes, phagosomes, and autophagosomes, whereas PI(4)P functions as a trafficking regulator in the Golgi apparatus (25, 26). Therefore, βV
spectrins are well suited to be recruited to different pools of cytosolic membranes, including trans-Golgi secretory vesicles.
Spectrin βV as a Cargo Adapter for Intracellular Transport in Mammalian
Vestibular Hair Cells. Several studies have indicated that spectrin
βH plays a role in membrane stabilization and vesicular transport to and from the plasma membrane in the apical region of
Drosophila epithelial cells (19, 20, 24, 27). In particular, overexpression of a C-terminal fragment of the protein, including the
PH domain, in salivary glands leads to the formation of dynaminsequestering expansions of the plasma membrane, possibly due
to the down-regulation of the endocytotic machinery (28, 29).
Overexpression of an equivalent fragment of the human spectrin
βV (R26-Cter, amino acids 3012–3674) in HeLa cells did not
have a conspicuous effect on the plasma membrane, but dramatically affected the organization of the cytoplasmic vesicular
membranes. Vesicles immunoreactive for this protein fragment
were detected a few hours after the cell transfection, and later
coalesced into giant interconnected multivesicular compartments
that invaded the entire cell body (SI Appendix, Fig. S5A).
To identify the spectrin βV-immunoreactive cytoplasmic
structures in mouse vestibular hair cells, we used TRITC-conjugated wheat germ agglutinin (WGA), which labels the Golgi
apparatus and Golgi-derived vesicles. We found that the WGA
staining overlapped substantially with the spectrin βV immunostaining in the Golgi perinuclear region and in punctate
structures extending toward the pericuticular region (Fig. 4 A
and B and SI Appendix, Fig. S5B). The colocalization of spectrin
βV and Golgi-derived structures was specific to spectrin βV and
to vestibular hair cells, as no overlap was observed between
WGA- and spectrin αII or βII stainings in vestibular hair cells
(Fig. 4C and SI Appendix, Fig. S5B), or between WGA- and
spectrin βV stainings in the cochlear outer hair cells (Fig. 4D).
Because Rab GTPases play a key role in the transport of post
Golgi-derived structures, we searched for a possible interaction
between spectrin βV and Rab8, which is involved in the transport
toward the plasma membrane in most epithelial cell types, including hair cells. We found that the R29-Cter fragment of
spectrin βV indeed bound to Rab8 present in protein extracts of
the inner ear or retina (Fig. 4E). Together, these results suggest
that in mammalian vestibular hair cells, spectrin βV, through its
interaction with Rab8, but without the assistance of spectrin αII,
is involved in the directional translocation of tethered vesicular
membranes to the plasma membrane. This conclusion is further
supported by the previously reported interaction of spectrin βV
with the dynein and kinesin complexes and with myosin VIIa,
motor proteins that move cargos along microtubules and along
actin filaments, respectively (30). Therefore, the involvement of
nonconventional β spectrins in cargo transport seems to be
evolutionarily conserved, despite differences in the subcellular
location of these proteins between nonmammalian and mammalian cells. The transport function, restricted to the cell apical
region in nonmammalian species, would have expanded to the
entire cytoplasmic region in mammalian vestibular hair cells
(and retinal photoreceptor cells), as inferred from the broad
distribution of spectrin βV in these cells (see Fig. 2B and ref. 30).
Spectrin βV and the Emergence of Somatic Electromotility. In the
cochlear outer hair cells, the reverse-transduction process
transforming the electrical receptor potential into a mechanical
force is powered by the prestin molecules in the lateral plasma
membrane. The cortical cytoskeleton, which is ∼25 nm distant
from the plasma membrane, is an integral part of the force
translation into the changes in cell length and stiffness that
characterize somatic electromotility (1–3, 7). Possibly selected
evolutionarily by virtue of its extended length, spectrin βV, with
its additional 13 spectrin repeats, is by far the most abundant β
subunit of the outer hair cell lateral wall, and its distribution
matches that of prestin (refs. 6, 17, and Fig. 2B). The presence of
spectrin βV in the lateral wall provides the outer hair cell with a
scaffold, both robust and flexible, that directly relays the
Fig. 4. Spectrin βV associates with post-Golgi
structures and binds to the Rab8 GTPase. (A) In
mouse isolated vestibular hair cells (VHCs) on P10,
the staining with TRITC-tagged wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) substantially overlaps with the spectrin
βV immunostaining, both in the Golgi apparatus and
in scattered post-Golgi secretory vesicles. (B) Focus
on a spectrin βV-immunoreactive and TRITC-WGAstained spot in the Golgi apparatus. (C) The TRITCWGA–stained structures (red) are not colocated with
spectrin αII- and spectrin βII-immunoreactive structures (green). (D) Unlike in VHCs, spectrin βV in
mouse cochlear outer hair cells (OHCs) does not
colocalize with TRITC-WGA–stained structures.
(E) Spectrin βV binds to Rab8, a small GTPase involved in vesicular trafficking toward the plasma
membrane. A GST-tagged R29-Cter fragment of
spectrin βV (GST-βV R29-Cter), but not GST alone,
binds to Rab8 present in protein extracts from the
mouse inner ear or retina. Bars, 2 μm.
Cortese et al. PNAS | February 21, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 8 | 2057
NEUROSCIENCE
membrane-based, voltage-dependent motor activity of prestin to
the underlying cytoskeleton. In addition, the spectrin αII/βV
crosslinks are expected to favor the longitudinal over circumferential mobility of lipids within plasma membrane microdomains,
which may also be relevant for the cell electromotility (31).
The cochlear outer hair cells are unique to mammals, but the
existence of somatic electromotility in nonmammalian species has
been a matter of debate (2, 3, 13). Indeed, it has been suggested
that a prestin-dependent amplification mechanism also exists in the
chicken auditory short hair cells, which could be correlated with the
presence of prestin in the plasma membrane of their apical circumference (12). Recent findings did support the idea that avian
hair cells produce mechanical force in vivo, but indicated that the
effect on the vibration of the auditory epithelium is insufficient to
sharpen tuning (5). In all frog hair cells and in the mouse vestibular
hair cells and cochlear inner hair cells, spectrin βV was detected
near the apical junctional complex. In addition, a trilaminate
structure of the lateral wall, including a lateral cistern and associated pillar and filament complexes, has been reported in the apical
region of inner hair cells, which however do not display electromotility (32). Together, these results support a scenario where the
trilaminate organization of the mammalian outer hair cells’ lateral
wall would have emerged from structures and molecular networks
initially present near the apical junctional complex in the hair cells
of mammalian ancestors. This putative apico-basal spreading along
the hair cell lateral wall in the course of evolution may have left
ontogenic traces in the present mammals, specifically, the expansion
of the spectrin βV and prestin distributions from the neck region of
the outer hair cells to their entire lateral wall during development,
which is concomitant to the onset of electromotility (6, 17) and SI
Appendix, Fig. S6). Likewise, the spreading of an actin- and spectrinbased cortical lattice has been reported in developing neuronal
cells: the cortical skeleton of axons, a periodic structure formed by
actin rings connected by flexible filaments made of βII, βIII, or βIV
spectrin, is initiated next to the cell body and gradually extends to
the axon terminals (22, 33, 34).
Adaptive Evolution of the Spectrin βV Amino Acid Sequence in the
Mammalian Lineage. We built a phylogenetic tree of the spectrin gene
family, based on multisequence alignments from vertebrate and invertebrate protein-coding sequences (Fig. 5A and SI Appendix, Fig. S7
and SI Appendix, Table S1). In addition, we analyzed the 13 genes
encoding proteins that contain spectrin repeats in the unicellular
choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis, one of the closest living relatives of metazoans, and identified three genes encoding spectrins.
Prediction of protein domains allowed us to differentiate an α
spectrin, a putative conventional β spectrin, and a putative βH spectrin. The latter contains 19 predicted spectrin repeats, two N-terminal
calponin homology (CH) domains, a src homology 3 (SH3) domain
(also present in the βH spectrins of invertebrate metazoans), and a
C-terminal PH domain (16), whereas the putative conventional
β spectrin only contains 16 predicted spectrin repeats and lacks a
C-terminal PH domain (Fig. 5A). This result indicates that the differentiation between nonconventional and conventional β spectrins
occurred in a unicellular ancestor of metazoans and preceded the
appearance of ankyrins because the genome of M. brevicollis does not
contain any ankyrin gene ortholog. The absence of a direct physical
interaction between ankyrin and nonconventional β spectrins shown
here (see Fig. 3A) further suggests that the binding to ankyrins was an
evolutionary acquisition of conventional β spectrins in metazoans.
Finally, a phylogenetic analysis of the modular structure of nonconventional β spectrins also allowed us to identify two substantial
changes during evolution of metazoans, i.e., the addition of several
spectrin repeats up to a total of 30 such repeats present in the βH
spectrins of invertebrates and the βV spectrins of vertebrates (19, 20,
27), and the removal of the SH3 domain, which is present in the two
β spectrins of M. brevicollis and in the βH spectrins of invertebrates,
but not in the βV spectrins of vertebrates (see Fig. 5A).
Fig. 5. Spectrin family tree and signatures of positive
selection in the amino acid sequences of mammalian
spectrins βV. (A) Neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree of
the complete spectrin gene family based on a multiple
full-length sequence alignment from vertebrate and
invertebrate species (Jones–Taylor–Thornton amino
acid substitution model). Vertebrate spectrin branches
were collapsed for the sake of clarity (see detailed tree
in SI Appendix, Fig. S7). Predicted domains of the
spectrins identified in the choanoflagellate Monosiga
brevicollis are shown on the right side of the corresponding tree branches: MONBRDRAFT_14504, _31289,
and _23028 refer to the putative α, β, and β-heavy (βH)
spectrins, respectively. The nonconventional β spectrins
of Drosophila (β-heavy) and mouse (βV) are shown for
comparison. Bar, 0.5 substitution per site. (B) Diagram
showing the positions of the amino acid residues submitted to positive selection in the mammalian lineage
for spectrin βV (35 codon sites). Corresponding positions
in the different vertebrate species are shown, with
upper numbers indicating the positions in the human
protein sequence. The protein domains are indicated
below by horizontal bars. The phylogenetic tree of this
spectrin is shown on the left side (the red and blue
arrows indicate the mammalian and avian focal
branches, respectively). Bar, 0.5 substitution per site.
The detailed results of the phylogenic molecular
analysis are presented in SI Appendix, Table S2. CH,
calponin homology domain; Rn, spectrin repeat
number n; PH, pleckstrin homology domain.
2058 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1618778114 Cortese et al.
In the course of evolution, most protein-coding DNA sequences
are dominated by purifying (or negative) selection, i.e., the removal of functionally deleterious mutations. Rarely, a protein
sequence will experience a burst of adaptive changes, driven by
Darwinian (or positive) selection, that increase fitness. Comparative phylogenetic analyses of prestin and other SLC proteins have
revealed significant adaptive changes in the amino acid sequence
of prestin that occurred after the split between the avian and
mammalian lineages. These changes have been related to the loss
of ion transport activity of the protein in mammalians and the
emergence of somatic electromotility in a subset of auditory hair
cells, i.e., the outer hair cells (8, 13). We sought evidence of
adaptive changes in the nucleotide sequences encoding all members of the α and β spectrin families using the modified branch-site
model A, test 2 of positive selection, which allows for the selection
intensity to vary among amino acid codon sites and among phylogenetic branches (SI Appendix, Materials and Methods). We
tested the focal branches (tested branches of an evolutionary tree)
in the lineage leading to mammals and the lineage leading to
birds, for which multiple sequences of high quality were available.
All β subunits, except βII, displayed signatures of positive selection
in the mammalian lineage. The nonconventional βV subunit
showed strong signatures of positive selection only in the lineage
leading to mammals (P < 1.0 e−5
). These signatures were identified at a total of 35 codon sites corresponding to amino acid positions in the first CH domain (CH1) and in several spectrin
repeats (R), including R1 and R2 that are involved in protein
dimerization (15). Three codon sites in the αII subunit, which
forms heterodimers with βV, also displayed strong signatures of
positive selection in the lineage leading to mammals (P = 1.2 e−3
)
(Fig. 5B and SI Appendix, Fig. S8 and SI Appendix, Table S2).
The adaptive mutations in the amino acid sequence of spectrin
βV are not sufficient to account for the changes of subcellular
localization of the protein that occurred in the lineage leading to
mammals because we were able to show that this localization differs
substantially between vestibular and cochlear hair cells in a given
species (mouse). However, they presumably contributed to these
changes by allowing new physical interactions with as yet unidentified
binding partners that would be produced or located differentially
between the different cell types, as already suggested for the phosphoinositide code (25, 26). Although prestin might also appear as a
good candidate at least in the outer hair cells, previous experiments
have led to the conclusion that a direct interaction between this
protein and spectrin βV is unlikely (17). Whatever the precise effects
of these amino acid substitutions in spectrin βV, we suggest that they
were evolutionarily selected in the mammalian lineage to serve the
emerging function of sound stimulus mechanical amplification by the
outer hair cells’ somatic electromotility, as previously suggested also
for prestin and the α10 subunit of the acetylcholine receptor (8).
From an evolutionary point of view, the critical role played by the
cochlear outer hair cells in spectral analysis of acoustic signals and
high-frequency hearing is indeed of utmost importance for the survival of most mammalian species (2, 3, 7).
Materials and Methods
A detailed description of the methods is available in SI Appendix, Materials
and Methods. Approval for the experiments using animals was obtained
from the Animal Use Committee of INSERM and Institut Pasteur. For immunofluorescence and immunoblot analyses, the reported antibodies were
used as described in ref. 30. Protein–protein and protein–lipid interaction
assays were carried out as described in ref. 17. In silico phylogenetic analyses
on the complete spectrin family were carried out as described in ref. 8.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank J. Boutet de Monvel for assistance in
data analyses, D. Rocancourt and J. Gros for providing us with avian tissue
samples, and S. Gribaldo for fruitful discussions. This work was supported
by Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) as part of the second “Investissements d’Avenir” program (ANR-15-RHUS-0001), Laboratoire d’Excellence (LABEX) Lifesenses [ANR-10-LABX-65], LHW-Stiftung, FAUN-Stiftung
(Suchert Foundation), and grants from ANPCyT from Argentina (to L.F.F.)
(PICT2012-0414; PICT2013-1642). M.C. and S.P. benefited from fellowships
from Ministère de l’Education Nationale de la Recherche et de Technologie (MNERT) and Fondation Retina-France, and F.P. received a CONICET
doctoral fellowship.
1. Brownell WE, Spector AA, Raphael RM, Popel AS (2001) Micro- and nanomechanics of
the cochlear outer hair cell. Annu Rev Biomed Eng 3:169–194.
2. Dallos P (2008) Cochlear amplification, outer hair cells and prestin. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 18(4):370–376.
3. Manley GA (2012) Evolutionary paths to mammalian cochleae. J Assoc Res
Otolaryngol 13(6):733–743.
4. Fettiplace R, Fuchs PA (1999) Mechanisms of hair cell tuning. Annu Rev Physiol 61:809–834.
5. Xia A, Liu X, Raphael PD, Applegate BE, Oghalai JS (2016) Hair cell force generation does
not amplify or tune vibrations within the chicken basilar papilla. Nat Commun 7:
13133–13144.
6. Belyantseva IA, Adler HJ, Curi R, Frolenkov GI, Kachar B (2000) Expression and localization of prestin and the sugar transporter GLUT-5 during development of electromotility in cochlear outer hair cells. J Neurosci 20(24):RC116–120.
7. Ashmore J (2008) Cochlear outer hair cell motility. Physiol Rev 88(1):173–210.
8. Franchini LF, Elgoyhen AB (2006) Adaptive evolution in mammalian proteins involved
in cochlear outer hair cell electromotility. Mol Phylogenet Evol 41(3):622–635.
9. Kavlie RG, et al. (2015) Prestin is an anion transporter dispensable for mechanical
feedback amplification in Drosophila hearing. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens
Neural Behav Physiol 201(1):51–60.
10. Albert JT, et al. (2007) Voltage-sensitive prestin orthologue expressed in zebrafish
hair cells. J Physiol 580(Pt. 2):451–461.
11. Adler HJ, et al. (2003) Expression of prestin, a membrane motor protein, in the
mammalian auditory and vestibular periphery. Hear Res 184(1-2):27–40.
12. Beurg M, Tan X, Fettiplace R (2013) A prestin motor in chicken auditory hair cells:
Active force generation in a nonmammalian species. Neuron 79(1):69–81.
13. Elgoyhen AB, Franchini LF (2011) Prestin and the cholinergic receptor of hair cells:
Positively-selected proteins in mammals. Hear Res 273(1-2):100–108.
14. Kalinec F, Holley MC, Iwasa KH, Lim DJ, Kachar B (1992) A membrane-based force generation mechanism in auditory sensory cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89(18):8671–8675.
15. De Matteis MA, Morrow JS (2000) Spectrin tethers and mesh in the biosynthetic
pathway. J Cell Sci 113(Pt 13):2331–2343.
16. Stabach PR, Morrow JS (2000) Identification and characterization of β V spectrin, a
mammalian ortholog of Drosophila β H spectrin. J Biol Chem 275(28):21385–21395.
17. Legendre K, Safieddine S, Küssel-Andermann P, Petit C, El-Amraoui A (2008) alphaIIbetaV spectrin bridges the plasma membrane and cortical lattice in the lateral wall of
the auditory outer hair cells. J Cell Sci 121(Pt 20):3347–3356.
18. Fritzsch B, Beisel KW, Pauley S, Soukup G (2007) Molecular evolution of the vertebrate
mechanosensory cell and ear. Int J Dev Biol 51(6-7):663–678.
19. Phillips MD, Thomas GH (2006) Brush border spectrin is required for early endosome
recycling in Drosophila. J Cell Sci 119(Pt 7):1361–1370.
20. McKeown C, Praitis V, Austin J (1998) sma-1 encodes a betaH-spectrin homolog required for Caenorhabditis elegans morphogenesis. Development 125(11):2087–2098.
21. Glenney JR, Jr, Glenney P, Weber K (1983) The spectrin-related molecule, TW-260/240,
cross-links the actin bundles of the microvillus rootlets in the brush borders of intestinal epithelial cells. J Cell Biol 96(5):1491–1496.
22. Zhong G, et al. (2014) Developmental mechanism of the periodic membrane skeleton
in axons. eLife 3:e04581.
23. Thomas GH, et al. (1997) Intragenic duplication and divergence in the spectrin superfamily of proteins. Mol Biol Evol 14(12):1285–1295.
24. Lee HG, Zarnescu DC, MacIver B, Thomas GH (2010) The cell adhesion molecule
Roughest depends on β(Heavy)-spectrin during eye morphogenesis in Drosophila.
J Cell Sci 123(Pt 2):277–285.
25. Kutateladze TG (2010) Translation of the phosphoinositide code by PI effectors. Nat
Chem Biol 6(7):507–513.
26. Balla T (2013) Phosphoinositides: Tiny lipids with giant impact on cell regulation.
Physiol Rev 93(3):1019–1137.
27. Praitis V, Ciccone E, Austin J (2005) SMA-1 spectrin has essential roles in epithelial cell
sheet morphogenesis in C. elegans. Dev Biol 283(1):157–170.
28. Williams JA, MacIver B, Klipfell EA, Thomas GH (2004) The C-terminal domain of
Drosophila (β) heavy-spectrin exhibits autonomous membrane association and modulates membrane area. J Cell Sci 117(Pt 5):771–782.
29. Lee SK, Thomas GH (2011) Rac1 modulation of the apical domain is negatively regulated by β (Heavy)-spectrin. Mech Dev 128(1-2):116–128.
30. Papal S, et al. (2013) The giant spectrin βV couples the molecular motors to phototransduction and Usher syndrome type I proteins along their trafficking route. Hum
Mol Genet 22(18):3773–3788.
31. de Monvel JB, Brownell WE, Ulfendahl M (2006) Lateral diffusion anisotropy and
membrane lipid/skeleton interaction in outer hair cells. Biophys J 91(1):364–381.
32. Furness DN, Hackney CM (1990) Comparative ultrastructure of subsurface cisternae in inner
and outer hair cells of the guinea pig cochlea. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 247(1):12–15.
33. Xu K, Zhong G, Zhuang X (2013) Actin, spectrin, and associated proteins form a periodic cytoskeletal structure in axons. Science 339(6118):452–456.
34. He J, et al. (2016) Prevalent presence of periodic actin-spectrin-based membrane
skeleton in a broad range of neuronal cell types and animal species. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 113(21):6029–6034.
Cortese et al. PNAS | February 21, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 8 | 2059
NEUROSCIENCE