α-Synuclein binds and sequesters PIKE-L into Lewy
bodies, triggering dopaminergic cell death via
AMPK hyperactivation
Seong Su Kanga
, Zhentao Zhanga
, Xia Liua
, Fredric P. Manfredssonb
, Li Hec
, P. Michael Iuvonec
, Xuebing Caod
,
Yi E. Sune,f, Lingjing Jing,1, and Keqiang Yea,e,f,1
a
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322; b
Translational Science and Molecular
Medicine, College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI 49503; c
Department of Ophthalmology and Pharmacology, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322; d
Department of Neurology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430022, China; e
Translational Center for Stem Cell Research, Tongji Hospital, Shanghai 200065, China; f
Department of Regenerative
Medicine, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China; and g
Department of Neurology, Tongji Hospital, Shanghai 200065, China
Edited by Solomon H. Snyder, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, and approved December 27, 2016 (received for review November
10, 2016)
The abnormal aggregation of fibrillar α-synuclein in Lewy bodies plays
a critical role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. However, the
molecular mechanisms regulating α-synuclein pathological effects
are incompletely understood. Here we show that α-synuclein binds
phosphoinositide-3 kinase enhancer L (PIKE-L) in a phosphorylationdependent manner and sequesters it in Lewy bodies, leading to
dopaminergic cell death via AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
hyperactivation. α-Synuclein interacts with PIKE-L, an AMPK inhibitory
binding partner, and this action is increased by S129 phosphorylation
through AMPK and is decreased by Y125 phosphorylation via Src family kinase Fyn. A pleckstrin homology (PH) domain in PIKE-L directly
binds α-synuclein and antagonizes its aggregation. Accordingly, PIKE-L
overexpression decreases dopaminergic cell death elicited by
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+), whereas PIKE-L knockdown elevates α-synuclein oligomerization and cell death. The overexpression
of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) or α-synuclein
induces greater dopaminergic cell loss and more severe motor defects
in PIKE-KO and Fyn-KO mice than in wild-type mice, and these effects
are attenuated by the expression of dominant-negative AMPK.
Hence, our findings demonstrate that α-synuclein neutralizes PIKEL’s neuroprotective actions in synucleinopathies, triggering dopaminergic neuronal death by hyperactivating AMPK.
neurodegenerative disease | dopamine | Lewy bodies
Parkinson’s disease (PD), the second most prevalent age-related
neurodegenerative disease, is characterized by progressive selective loss of dopaminergic (DAergic) neurons in the substantia
nigra pars compacta with the concomitant loss of nigrostriatal
DAergic termini and the resulting motor symptoms. Altered protein folding is thought to play a key role in the etiopathogenesis of
PD, because the disorder is characterized neuropathologically by
the accumulation of intraneuronal protein aggregates (Lewy bodies). The principal component of the Lewy body is aggregated
α-synuclein (1). Point mutations in the α-synuclein gene (SNCA)
cause rare familial forms of PD. Importantly, multiplication of
wild-type SNCA also causes a familial form of PD, indicating that
an increased level of normal α-synuclein protein is sufficient to
cause the disease. The Lewy bodies stain positively for α-synuclein,
ubiquitin, and a specific form of posttranslationally modified
α-synuclein that is phosphorylated on S129 and is found only in
Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites. The C terminus of α-synuclein can
be phosphorylated at Y125 and at S129 by Src family kinase Fyn
and various casein kinases or AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK), respectively (2–5). It has been proposed that p-Y125 and
p-S129 have opposing effects on neurotoxicity and soluble oligomer
formation. α-Synuclein neurotoxicity in PD may result from an
imbalance between the detrimental, oligomer-promoting effect of
p-S129 and a neuroprotective action of p-Y125 that inhibits toxic
oligomer formation (6). AMPK consists of α, β, and γ subunits. The
α subunit possesses catalytic activity. Phosphorylation of the Thr
residue at 172 in the α subunit is essential for AMPK activation to
function as a protein kinase (7). AMPK is a key sensor of cellular
energy status. AMPK signaling regulates the energy balance at the
cellular, organ, and whole-body level. AMPK activation may have
dual functions in the regulation of neuronal survival and death:
AMPK provides a protective effect during transient energy depletion, as exemplified in a model of neuronal Ca2+ overloading.
Conversely, prolonged AMPK activation can lead to neuronal cell
death (8). AMPK activation is commonly present in many neurological diseases, including stroke (9), Huntington’s disease (10),
Alzheimer’s disease (11), and synucleinopathies (5). Lactate levels
are increased in the aging brain (12), in PD-affected subjects as
compared with age-matched controls (13), and in mice treated with
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) (14). Recently,
it has been reported that lactic acid up-regulates the activity of
AMPK (15), leading to α-synuclein accumulation and oligomerization via AMPK phosphorylation of S129 in a time- and concentrationdependent manner (5). Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase enhancers
(PIKEs) are a family of GTPases that participate in multiple cellular
processes including cell survival, brain development, memory formation, and metabolism (16–18). In the CNS, phosphoinositide-3
kinase enhancer L (PIKE-L) is highly enriched in the nerve termini (19–21) where it interacts with various receptors to trigger
PI3K activation and displays neuroprotective activities (21, 22). In
addition, PIKE-L exerts neuroprotective actions by protecting the
DNase inhibitor SET from degradation by asparagine endopeptidase during stroke or kainic acid treatment (23). Interestingly,
Significance
We discovered that α-synuclein interacts with the neuroprotective protein phosphoinositide-3 kinase enhancer L (PIKE-L)
in an S129 phosphorylation-dependent manner and sequesters
PIKE-L in Lewy bodies, leading to the hyperactivation of AMPactivated protein kinase (AMPK) and subsequent dopaminergic
neuronal cell death. Our findings may identify a molecular
mechanism by which α-synuclein triggers dopaminergic neuronal
cell death in Parkinson’s disease.
Author contributions: S.S.K., Z.Z., L.J., and K.Y. designed research; S.S.K., Z.Z., and X.L.
performed research; F.P.M., L.H., and P.M.I. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; X.C.,
Y.E.S., and L.J. analyzed data; and K.Y. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1
To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: kye@emory.edu or lingjingjin@163.
com.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1618627114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1618627114 PNAS | January 31, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 5 | 1183–1188
NEUROSCIENCE
PIKE-L is important in regulating the development of the neocortex
(24) and also is implicated in brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF)/TrkB signaling cascades. The BDNF-mediated PI3K/Akt
pathway, but not the MAPK pathway, is selectively diminished when
PIKE is depleted. Consequently, PIKE−/− neurons are more vulnerable to glutamate- or stroke-induced cell death (24–26). Most
recently, we demonstrated that PIKE-A, an isoform in the PIKE
family, binds the AMPK α subunit and suppresses its activation and
kinase activity, and this interaction is enhanced by Fyn phosphorylation of PIKE-A (27). In the current study, we report that
α-synuclein associates with PIKE-L, which is regulated by p-S129
and p-Y125, which in turn are mediated by AMPK and Fyn, respectively. This interaction prevents α-synuclein aggregation and
blocks its neurotoxic effect. Using both 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium
(MPP+
) neurotoxin and α-synuclein genetic models of nigrostriatal
degeneration, we demonstrate that PIKE-L and Fyn are required to
prevent DAergic cell loss from both toxic stimuli and that inhibition
of AMPK rescues DAergic cell death triggered by MPTP. This
finding may provide insight into the molecular mechanism by which
α-synuclein exerts its neurotoxic effects in DAergic neurons and may
shed important light on the etiology of PD.
Results
α-Synuclein Binds PIKE-L in an S129 Phosphorylation-Dependent
Manner. To explore whether PIKE-L is implicated in DAergic
neuronal survival, we monitored dopamine (DA) metabolism in the
substantia nigra, striatum, and hippocampus of wild-type mice and
age-matched PIKE-KO littermates. DA is primarily oxidized
by monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) into the metabolite 3,4-
dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC). HPLC analysis revealed
that striatal DA and DOPAC did not differ in 3-m-old wild-type
and PIKE−/− mice. By contrast, DA levels in the substantia nigra
and hippocampus in were significantly reduced 3- and 8-mo-old
PIKE−/− mice (Fig. S1), indicating that DA metabolism is altered
when PIKE is knocked out. Hence, PIKE might be involved in PD
progression. Because lactate activates AMPK, which promotes
phosphorylation of α-synuclein on S129, leading to its aggregation
and neuritis reduction (5), we hypothesized that there might be
crosstalk between PIKE and α-synuclein. Coimmunoprecipitation
showed that α-synuclein interacts with PIKE-L upon activation of
AMPK via 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide
(AICAR) or metformin treatment, whereas the AMPK inhibitor
compound C blocks this interaction (Fig. 1A, Top). Phosphorylation of AMPK and α-synuclein (S129) correlated with the binding
affinities between PIKE-L and α-synuclein (Fig. 1A, Third and
Bottom). As expected, the nonphosphorylatable S129A mutant
barely interacted with PIKE-L regardless of AMPK activation
status (Fig. 1B), indicating that S129 phosphorylation is required for
α-synuclein to associate with PIKE-L. Consequently, constitutively
active AMPK (AMPK-CA) strongly phosphorylated α-synuclein on
S129, resulting in increased association with PIKE-L, compared
with control or kinase-dead AMPK (AMP-KD) (Fig. 1C). Accordingly, the phosphorylation mimetic mutant α-synuclein S129D
demonstrated a strong interaction with PIKE-L, but S129A did not
bind PIKE-L to any significant degree (Fig. 1D), suggesting that
S129 phosphorylation is indispensable for the association between
α-synuclein and PIKE-L. Coimmunoprecipitation revealed that
endogenous PIKE-L and α-synuclein interact with each other specifically in the brain (Fig. 1E). Finally, to assess whether PIKE-L
interacts with α-synuclein in the brains of humans with PD, we
conducted dual-label immunohistochemical staining and found that
PIKE and α-synuclein colocalized in Lewy body inclusions (Fig. 1F),
indicating that they might bind to each other in the Lewy bodies and
that PIKE-L might be implicated in PD etiology via interaction with
α-synuclein. A truncation assay revealed that the PIKE-L C-terminal
fragment comprising amino acids 900–1,186 is not required for
α-synuclein binding (Fig. S2A). Fragmenting PIKE-L further into
different functional domains, we found that the pleckstrin homology
(PH) domain in PIKE-L interacted directly with α-synuclein in a
GST pull-down assay (Fig. S2B). An in vitro aggregation assay
demonstrated that the PH domain significantly reduced the aggregation of both wild-type α-synuclein and the A53T mutant as
measured by a Thioflavin T aggregation assay (Fig. S2C). Ultracentrifugation also showed that the presence of the PH domain
reduces the degree of aggregated α-synuclein in the pellet, resulting
in the augmentation of soluble α-synuclein (Fig. S2D). EM analysis
validated the fibrillization of recombinant α-synuclein proteins (Fig.
S2E). Hence, these studies indicate that the PIKE-L PH domain
binds α-synuclein and inhibits its aggregation. Phosphorylation of
α-synuclein on amino acids Y125 and S129 produces opposing effects (6). Accordingly, we wanted to test whether Fyn phosphorylation of Y125 also regulates the binding activity of α-synuclein with
PIKE-L. Coimmunoprecipitation revealed that constitutively active
Fyn (Fyn-CA) strongly phosphorylated α-synuclein Y125, abolishing
the association between PIKE-L and α-synuclein (Fig. S3A). When
Fyn was inhibited by Src kinase inhibitor (PP2), but not by the inactive analog of PP2 (PP3), α-synuclein binding to PIKE-L was
elevated (Fig. S3B, first blot). As expected, α-synuclein Y125
phosphorylation was potently blocked by PP2 but not by PP3 (Fig.
S3B, sixth blot), indicating that Fyn-mediated Y125 phosphorylation
inhibits the association between PIKE-L and α-synuclein. These
findings also were confirmed in vivo (Fig. S3C). Thus, Fyn phosphorylates α-synuclein Y125 and blocks its binding to PIKE-L.
Fig. 1. α-Synuclein binds PIKE-L in an S129 phosphorylation-dependent manner. (A) AMPK mediates the interaction between PIKE-L and α-synuclein. HEK
293 cells were cotransfected with Myc–PIKE-L and GFP–α-synuclein and were
treated with AICAR (200 μM), metformin (1 mM), or compound C (200 nM) for
24 h. The binding between PIKE-L and α-synuclein was confirmed using
immunoprecipitation. (B) α-Synuclein S129 phosphorylation is required for
α-synuclein to bind PIKE-L. HEK 293 cells were cotransfected with Myc–PIKE-L
and GFP–α-synuclein S129A and were treated with AICAR, metformin, or compound C. The binding between PIKE-L and S129A was confirmed using immunoprecipitation. The expression of AMPK, transfected PIKE-L, and α-synuclein
was examined also. (C) AMPK-CA elevates the PIKE-L/α-synuclein interaction.
Myc-PIKE-L and GFP-α-synuclein were cotransfected to HEK 293 cells with wildtype AMPK, AMPK-CA, or AMPK-KD. (D) S129 phosphorylation of α-synuclein is
required for the binding of α-synuclein to PIKE-L. Myc-PIKE-L was cotransfected
to HEK 293 cells with GFP–α-synuclein wild-type, S129D, or S129A. The binding
of these proteins was examined by immunoprecipitation. (E) Endogenous PIKE-L
binds α-synuclein in mouse brain. Immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting
were performed in substantia nigra lysates of wild-type and PIKE-KO mice. The
interaction of α-synuclein (S129) and PIKE-L in the brain was confirmed. (F) PIKEL/α-synuclein colocalization in Lewy bodies. PIKE-L (green) was stained with
α-synuclein (red) in cortex from normal controls and patients with PD. PIKE-L and
α-synuclein were colocalized in Lewy bodies (arrows). (Scale bar, 100 μm.)
1184 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1618627114 Kang et al.
α-Synuclein Overexpression Strips PIKE-L from AMPK, Inducing AMPK
Activation and Cell Death. To explore whether α-synuclein overexpression affects the association between PIKE-L and AMPK, we
performed a competition assay. We found that the association between PIKE-L and AMPK was gradually repressed as the concentration of α-synuclein was progressively increased (Fig. 2A, Top).
Notably, AMPK T172 phosphorylation was steadily increased in an
α-synuclein dose-dependent manner (Fig. 2A, Fourth and Fifth),
whereas PIKE-L overexpression suppressed its phosphorylation.
Consequently, knockdown of endogenous PIKE by shRNA expression elicited additional AMPK T172 phosphorylation and its downstream signaling, Acetyl-CoA carboxylase phosphorylation (p-ACC),
tightly coupled with p-AMPK patterns (Fig. 2B). As a major energy
sensor in cells, AMPK activation is intimately regulated by the cellular AMP/ATP ratio. Overexpression of α-synuclein elevates the
cellular ADP/ATP ratio, presumably because of α-synuclein’s ability
to modulate mitochondrial function. This ratio was reduced by
PIKE-L overexpression. Knockdown of endogenous PIKE-L led to
further escalation of ADP/ATP ratios (Fig. 2C). A cell-death assay
in which lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was released in the medium showed similar patterns, demonstrating that α-synuclein
overexpression induced DAergic cell death, which was attenuated by
concomitant PIKE-L overexpression. Finally, PIKE-L knockdown
further enhanced the neurodegenerative effect of α-synuclein (Fig.
2D). Lactate induces AMPK activation and α-synuclein S129 phosphorylation, leading to its aggregation and neurite reduction (5). The
neurotoxicity of α-synuclein is related to its oligomerization or
fibrillization. To assess the effect of PIKE-L on α-synuclein aggregation, we transfected SH-SY5Y cells with PIKE-L plasmid or
silenced PIKE-L expression using shRNA, followed by infection with
a virus expressing α-synuclein. Next, we treated the cells with vehicle
or 20 mM lactate for 3 d. Lactate treatment strongly induced AMPK
pathway activation (p-T172 and p-ACC), which was blocked by
PIKE-L overexpression, whereas knockdown of PIKE-L resulted in
further activation of AMPK. Noticeably, lactate triggered α-synuclein
aggregation, which was exacerbated in the PIKE-L–depleted cells,
whereas overexpression of PIKE-L reduced α-synuclein aggregation
(Fig. 2E), in keeping with our in vitro observations that the PIKE-L
PH domain inhibits α-synuclein aggregation (Fig. S2 D and E).
Interestingly, PIKE-L knockdown elevated lactate-mediated autophagy as seen by increases in the autophagy biomarker microtubuleassociated protein 1A/1B-light chain 3 (LC3-II), whereas autophagy
was suppressed by PIKE-L overexpression. (Fig. 2E, Bottom). Cellular ADP/ATP ratios corresponded with p-AMPK levels (Fig. 2F)
and an LDH cell-death analysis (Fig. 2G). Accordingly, these
findings suggest that AMPK activation mediates neurodegeneration
induced by α-synuclein overexpression and that PIKE-L plays a
crucial protective role by blocking AMPK activation.
PIKE-L Is Required for DAergic Neuronal Survival in the MPTP Mouse
Model. To investigate the physiological role of the PIKE-L/
α-synuclein interaction in the MPTP model of PD, we treated wildtype mice, PIKE-KO mice, and Fyn-KO mice with saline or 15 mg/kg
of MPTP two times/wk for 5 wk, followed by behavioral assays to
assess motor functions. Tyrosine hydroxylase-positive (TH+
) neurons and terminals were reduced in all MPTP-treated substantia
nigra and striatum (Fig. 3A). Quantitative immunohistochemistry
using an LC3-II antibody revealed that MPTP triggered more robust autophagy in PIKE-KO and Fyn-KO mice than in wild-type
mice (Fig. 3B). Notably, S129 phosphorylation was elevated upon
MPTP treatment in all mice, and MPTP treatment increased the
degree to which p-S129 α-synuclein bound to PIKE-L (Fig. 3C, Top
and Second). As expected, AMPK and ACC phosphorylation was
enhanced by MPTP because knockout of PIKE or Fyn activates the
AMPK/ACC pathway (28, 29). Noticeably, MPTP treatment further
elevated AMPK/ACC signal pathways (Fig. 3C, Third through
Sixth). Moreover, immunoblotting of LC3-II was consistent with the
quantitative data in Fig. 3B. Motor behavioral tests using the grid
performance and the rotarod test demonstrated that MPTP treatment resulted in significant impairments in locomotor functions
compared with saline (control) treatment. Remarkably, and in
agreement with our histological findings, both MPTP-treated
PIKE-KO and Fyn-KO mice exhibited much more severe motor
impairments than wild-type mice (Fig. 3 D and E). MPTP induced
much stronger reductions of both DA and DOPAC in PIKE-null
and Fyn-KO mice than in wild-type mice (Fig. S4 A and B).
Quantitative densitometric analyses of TH immunoreactivity in
both the substantia nigra and striatum supported the finding that
MPTP produced greater DAergic neurodegeneration in PIKE-null
and Fyn-KO mice than in wild-type mice (Fig. S4 C and D). In
alignment with the hyperactivation of p-AMPK/p-ACC, the measured ADP/ATP ratio demonstrated that MPTP provoked stronger
activity in both PIKE-null and Fyn-KO mice than in wild-type mice
(Fig. S4E). Together, these data suggest that PIKE prevents
MPTP-induced DAergic neurodegeneration and that Fyn negatively regulates the association between PIKE-L and α-synuclein.
Therefore, depletion of Fyn stimulates α-synuclein to block the
interaction between PIKE-L and AMPK, resulting in AMPK
hyperactivation and the subsequent DAergic neurodegeneration.
PIKE-L Is Required for DAergic Neuronal Survival in the α-Synuclein
Transgenic Mouse Model. To interrogate further the pathological
role of PIKE in PD pathogenesis, we used adeno-associated virus
(AAV) to overexpress α-synuclein unilaterally in the substantia
nigra, an established model of nigrostriatal neurodegeneration.
The contralateral (control) hemisphere was treated with AAV
expressing GFP. Immunofluorescent analysis of TH immunoreactivity indicated that nigral α-synuclein overexpression resulted in
significant nigrostriatal denervation in both PIKE-null and Fyn-KO
mice compared with the GFP-treated contralateral hemisphere
Fig. 2. PIKE suppresses AMPK phosphorylation and cell death induced by
α-synuclein. (A) α-Synuclein competes with AMPK for binding to PIKE-L. GFP–
α-synuclein was transfected into SH-SY5Y cells at different doses (0, 5, 10, and
15 μg). The binding of AMPK and PIKE-L was examined by immunoprecipitation. (B)
PIKE mediates AMPK signaling activation induced by α-synuclein. GFP–α-synuclein
was transfected into SH-SY5Y cells. Twenty-four hours later, the cells were infected with virus overexpressing PIKE, virus expressing PIKE shRNA, or vehicle.
Forty-eight hours later, phosphorylation of AMPK and ACC was confirmed by
immunoblotting. (C) Quantitative analysis of the ADP/ATP ratio in these cell lysates and cell media. (D) LDH analysis in these cell lysates and cell media. (E)
Immunoblotting analysis of lactate-treated cells infected with PIKE-L or its
shRNA. Cortical neurons were cultured and were infected with AAV–α-synuclein
at 7 d in vitro and 2 d later were infected with Adeno-PIKE or Adeno–Sh-PIKE
virus. On the day after Adeno virus infection, cells were treated with lactate (0 or
20 mM) for 3 d. α-Synuclein, p-S129, p-AMPK/AMPK, PIKE-L, and LC3-II were
examined by immunoblotting. N.S., nonspecific band. (F) ADP/ATP ratios were
examined in these lysates and cell media. (G) LDH analysis in these lysates and cell
media. Data are shown as mean ± SEM (n = 3 each group). *P < 0.05.
Kang et al. PNAS | January 31, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 5 | 1185
NEUROSCIENCE
(Fig. 4A, Middle and Bottom). Moreover, autophagy (LC3-II
staining) in the substantia nigra was increased in both PIKE-null
and Fyn-KO mice (Fig. 4A, Top). Quantitative analysis showed that
α-synuclein–induced LC3-II was significantly elevated in PIKE-null
and Fyn-KO mice compared with wild-type mice. Again, the contralateral hemisphere treated with AAV-GFP displayed only a
basal level of LC3-II, which was not different in any groups (Fig.
4B). Immunoblotting of substantia nigra lysates demonstrated that
α-synuclein overexpression induced AMPK/ACC activation in
wild-type mice. Notably, α-synuclein was clearly phosphorylated at
S129 (Fig. 4C, Left). By contrast, α-synuclein overexpression in
PIKE-null mice triggered a higher degree of AMPK/ACC phosphorylation and loss of TH. As expected, we found that S129
phosphorylation was significantly increased with the hyperactivation of AMPK in the absence of PIKE. Because Fyn blocks
AMPK activation via both the liver kinase B1 (LKB1) and PIKE
pathways (27–29), knockout of Fyn led to stronger activation of
p-AMPK/p-ACC, which was further hyperactivated by α-synuclein.
S129 phosphorylation was highly elevated in Fyn-KO mice (Fig. 4C,
Right). Remarkably, autophagy (as measured by LC3-II levels) was
enhanced by α-synuclein, and the levels of LC3-II showed an incremental increase from wild-type mice to PIKE-null mice and were
highest in Fyn-null mice, tightly coupled to p-AMPK and p-S129
signals in all groups (Fig. 4C, Right). Behavioral analysis indicated
that overexpression of α-synuclein significantly impaired motor
functions in both PIKE-null and Fyn-KO mice compared with wildtype mice. Moreover, in comparison with GFP, α-synuclein overexpression triggered pronounced motor deficits in both PIKE-null
and Fyn-KO mice but not in wild-type mice (Fig. 4 D and E). In
alignment with DAergic neuronal loss, DA and its metabolite
DOPAC were reduced in the substantia nigra and striatum of
PIKE-null and Fyn-KO mice as compared with wild-type mice (Fig.
S5 A–D). Quantitative analysis of TH immunoreactivity in the
substantia nigra and striatum supported these findings (Fig. S5 E
and F). Consistent with AMPK activation by α-synuclein overexpression, ADP/ATP ratios were greatly enhanced in wild-type
mice and were further augmented in PIKE-null and Fyn KO mice
(Fig. S5G). These findings suggest that hyperactivation of AMPK by
α-synuclein overexpression in the absence of PIKE or Fyn leads to
DAergic neuronal loss via autophagy and apoptosis.
AMPK Activation Mediates DAergic Cell Death Triggered by MPP+.
MPP+ impairs mitochondrial respiration, resulting in the formation of high levels of reactive oxygen species that ultimately
lead to apoptosis, necrosis, and autophagy, depending on the
dose (Fig. S6) (30, 31).
AMPK Is Required for DAergic Neuronal Loss in the MPTP Mouse
Model (Fig. S7). Detailed information is supplied in SI Results.
Also see Figs. S6 and S7.
The AMPK Signaling Pathway Is Highly Activated in Dementia with
Lewy Bodies. Our findings suggest that α-synuclein binds PIKE-L
and sequesters it into Lewy bodies by stripping it away from AMPK,
leading to hyperactivation of AMPK (and neurodegeneration in
PD mouse models). To examine whether this hypothesis applies to
human disease, we evaluated these signaling pathways in brains
from patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) after ultracentrifugation. Compared with healthy control brains, PIKE-L
Fig. 3. MPTP induces AMPK hyperactivation in PIKE−/− and Fyn−/− mice,
triggering DA neuron autophagy. Wild-type, PIKE-KO, or Fyn-KO mice were
treated with MPTP two times/wk for 5 wk. (A, Top Row) DAergic neurons
were greatly decreased by MPTP treatment in PIKE-KO or Fyn-KO substantia
nigra. Autophagy in the damaged substantia nigra was measured via immunohistochemistry using LC3-II antibody. (Scale bar, 50 μm.) (Middle and
Bottom Rows) Immunofluorescence with anti-TH shows the reduction of
DAergic cell bodies in the substantia nigra and striatum of MPTP-injected
wild-type, PIKE-KO, and Fyn-KO mice compared with saline-injected mice.
(Scale bar, 200 μm.) (B) Quantification of autophagy. LC3-II+ cells in the
substantia nigra showed the increased neuronal autophagy in PIKE-KO and
Fyn-KO mice compared with wild-type mice. (C) MPTP induces p-AMPK and
LC3-II in PIKE-KO and Fyn-KO mice. The changes in protein levels in substantia nigra lysates from MPTP-treated animals were analyzed by immunoblotting. (D and E) Motor defects in mice were measured by performance
in the grid (D) and rotarod (E) tests. Data are shown as mean ± SEM (n = 6–8
mice per group). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
Fig. 4. α-Synuclein induces AMPK hyperactivation in PIKE−/− and Fyn−/−
mice, triggering DA neuronal cell death via autophagy. AAV–α-synuclein or
AAV-GFP was injected into the right substantia nigra of wild-type, PIKE-KO,
and Fyn-KO mice. The animals were killed 2 mo after vector delivery.
Overexpression of α-synuclein enhances autophagy in PIKE-KO or Fyn-KO
mice. (A, Top Row) Autophagy in damaged substantia nigra was shown by
immunohistochemistry using LC3-II antibody. (Scale bar, 50 μm.) (Middle and
Bottom Rows) Immunofluorescence with anti-TH showed the reduction of
DAergic cells in substantia nigra and nigrostriatal terminals in wild-type,
PIKE-KO, and Fyn-KO mice injected with AAV–α-synuclein compared with
mice injected with AAV-GFP. (Scale bar, 200 μm.) (B) Quantification of
autophagy. An increase in LC3-II+ cells in the substantia nigra demonstrates
increased neuronal autophagy in PIKE-KO and Fyn-KO mice compared with
wild-type mice. (C) α-Synuclein overexpression induces p-AMPK and autophagy in PIKE-KO and Fyn-KO mice. The changes in protein levels in lysates
of substantia nigra with overexpressed α-synuclein were analyzed by immunoblotting. (D and E) Motor defects in mice were measured by the cylinder (D) and rotarod (E) tests. Data are shown as mean ± SEM (n = 6–8 mice
per group). *P < 0.05.
1186 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1618627114 Kang et al.
content in the supernatant was reduced in the brains from DLB
patients compared with control brains; accordingly, its levels were
increased in the pellet fraction of samples from DLB patients. On
the other hand, α-synuclein monomer levels were reduced in the
supernatant of DLB brain samples, but its aggregated/oligomeric
form was elevated in the pellet (Fig. 5A, First to Fourth). Interestingly, the total level of Fyn was reduced in the DLB brains
compared with brains from healthy controls. Consistently, p-AMPK/
p-ACC and α-synuclein p-S129 were significantly enhanced in DLB
brains compared with controls (Fig. 5A, Fifth through Ninth). As
expected, levels of the autophagy marker LC3-II were markedly
higher in DLB brains than in controls. Interestingly, the apoptotic
marker active caspase-3 was slightly higher in DLB brains than in
controls (Fig. 5A), indicating that neuronal cell death in synucleinopathies might be caused primarily by AMPK-mediated excessive autophagy combined with neuronal apoptosis. ADP/ATP
ratios also supported the finding that AMPK was highly activated
in DLB brains as compared with control brains (Fig. 5 B and C).
PIKE-L and Fyn were significantly reduced in DLB brains compared with control brains (Fig. 5 D and E). Collectively, our
in vitro, in vivo, and human patient data support the hypothesis
that aggregated p-S129 α-synuclein binds strongly to PIKE-L and
sequesters it into the Lewy bodies. This process, which is negatively regulated by Fyn tyrosine kinase, ultimately leads to AMPK
hyperactivation and DAergic neurodegeneration.
Discussion
In the current report we show that α-synuclein overexpression or
MPTP administration triggers AMPK/ACC signaling activation,
leading to the phosphorylation of α-synuclein S129 by activated
AMPK; that the α-synuclein/PIKE-L association is dependent on
S129 phosphorylation; and that this action is mediated by AMPKmediated phosphorylation of α-synuclein S129. This result is consistent with previous findings (32) in which McFarland et al. used
proteomics/mass spectrometry to demonstrate that p-S129 synuclein selectively binds PIKE. Overexpression of PIKE-L represses
the DAergic neurodegeneration induced by lactate or α-synuclein
overexpression (Fig. 2). On the other hand, knockout of PIKE-L or
Fyn leads to AMPK hyperactivation by MPTP or α-synuclein
overexpression, triggering DAergic neuronal death (Figs. 2–5).
Conceivably, p-S129 α-synuclein sequesters PIKE-L into the Lewy
body inclusions. As expected, AMPK signaling is hyperactivated in
PD brains, inducing extensive autophagy and some degree of apoptosis, as previously reported in human PD brain samples (33).
Our findings described herein support the following molecular
model: MPTP and α-synuclein interfere with complex I in the
electron transport system in the mitochondria (34–36), causing
mitochondrial dysfunction and the resultant oxidative stress and
ultimately resulting in energy depletion (elevation of the ADP/ATP
ratio) and AMPK activation. The activated AMPK phosphorylates
α-synuclein on S129, elicits its association with PIKE-L, and sequesters it into Lewy bodies. This process subsequently removes
PIKE-L’s inhibitory effect on AMPK activation, results in a feedforward scenario with increased S129 phosphorylation by AMPK,
and increases the formation of the α-synuclein/PIKE-L complex.
This process is further escalated by reduced levels of Fyn, which
lead to LKB1 activation and concurrent AMPK activation (29). On
the other hand, diminished Fyn tyrosine kinase disrupts the formation of the PIKE-L/α-synuclein complex. These interrelated
processes ultimately induce AMPK hyperactivation, triggering
neurodegeneration via excessive autophagy, accompanied by apoptosis in nigral neurons of PD brains (Fig. 5F). It is worth noting
that we have reported previously that PIKE binds Akt and elevates
its kinase activity and that knockout of PIKE diminishes its kinase
activity (16, 24, 37). Sequestration of PIKE into the Lewy bodies in
PD may strip PIKE away from both Akt and AMPK, additively
contributing to neuronal cell death by inhibiting prosurvival signaling from Akt and amplifying the autophagic effects from hyperactive AMPK. Fyn inhibits AMPK activation via both the LKB1
pathway and the PIKE-L/α-synuclein complex; thus, depletion of
Fyn exhibits stronger p-AMPK signals than PIKE knockout or
knockdown alone and results in more severe DAergic neuronal loss
and motor deficits than seen in PIKE-null mice (Figs. 3–5). To
discern which form of cell death is mainly responsible for MPP+
-
induced AMPK activation in DAergic cells, we found that depletion of either of PIKE-L or Fyn activated AMPK, leading to robust
autophagy and apoptosis, which could be blocked by dominantnegative AMPK (AMPK-DN). It was notable that the inhibition
of autophagy in SH-SY5Y DAergic cells triggered by MPP+ via
3-methyladenine (3-MA) gradually reduced cell death associated
with LDH release (i.e., necrosis), whereas apoptosis increased
progressively (Fig. S6). Hence, these findings suggest that AMPK
might mediate DAergic cell death upon MPP+ treatment primarily
through excessive autophagy, in keeping with the controversial view
of apoptosis in PD (38). Accordingly, in PIKE-null and Fyn-KO
mice, overexpression of AMPK-DN suppressed MPTP-induced
autophagy in the substantia nigra, leading to improved DAergic
neuronal survival and motor function (Fig. S7). These findings are
in agreement with a previous report that blockade of AMPK activation by the expression of AMPK-DN strongly inhibits DA
neuron atrophy with moderate suppression of apoptosis and that
overactivation of AMPK conversely strengthens DA neuronal
degeneration induced by 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) (39).
Furthermore, suppression of AMPK activity, either pharmacologically or genetically, exerts neuroprotective effects in cerebral
ischemia (9, 40). Taken together, our results provide compelling
evidence supporting the role of AMPK in DAergic cell death in
Fig. 5. AMPK is hyperactivated in patients with DLB and is associated with
substantial autophagy in the substantia nigra. (A) PIKE-L is sequestrated by
α-synuclein into insoluble inclusions in the brains of humans with DLB. The
changes in PIKE-L, Fyn, and α-synuclein were examined by immunoblotting of
samples from brains of healthy controls and patients with DLB. Phosphorylation
of AMPK and ACC was confirmed. Moreover, autophagy and apoptosis were
verified by immunoblotting of anti–LC3-II and anti-active caspase-3. (B–E)
Quantitative analysis of ADP/ATP ratios (B), p-AMPK/AMPK (C), PIKE-L (D), and
Fyn (E) in brains from controls and patients with DLB. The increase in the ADP/
ATP ratio in patients with DLB was measured in human brain lysates (B). Densitometric analysis of immunoblotting shows the increase in p-AMPK (C) and the
reduction of PIKE-L (D) and Fyn (E) in DLB tissues compared with controls. Data
are shown as mean ± SEM (n = 4 each group). *P < 0.05. (F) The schematic model
demonstrates that α-synuclein and MPTP might induce hyperactivation of AMPK
and DAergic neuronal death by sequestering PIKE-L so that it cannot inhibit
AMPK. Solid lines indicate results proved in the present study, and dashed lines
indicate results from previous studies.
Kang et al. PNAS | January 31, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 5 | 1187
NEUROSCIENCE
PD pathogenesis. Specifically, α-synuclein overexpression or treatment with neurotoxins elicits AMPK activation, which subsequently
phosphorylates S129, triggering α-synuclein binding to PIKE-L and
the sequestration of the latter into Lewy bodies. This action alleviates the inhibitory effect of PIKE-L on AMPK activation, leading to AMPK hyperactivation and DAergic cell loss via excessive
autophagy in PD.
Methods
Animal care and handling were performed according to the Declaration of
Helsinki and Emory Medical School guidelines. The protocol was reviewed and
approved by the Emory Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Investigators were blinded to the group allocation during the animal experiments.
Human Tissue Samples. Postmortem brain samples were dissected from
frozen brains from four control cases (age 71.2 ± 20.2 y, mean ± SEM) and
four DLB cases (age 73.8 ± 9.3 y, mean ± SEM) from the Emory Alzheimer’s
Disease Research Center. The study was approved by the biospecimen
committee of Emory University. DLB cases were clinically diagnosed and
neuropathologically confirmed.
In Vitro Aggregation of α-Synuclein. Purified α-synuclein protein (rPeptide,
5 mg/mL) was first incubated with vehicle or the PH domain of PIKE for 1 h
and was dialyzed against PBS, pH 7.0. The samples were incubated at 37 °C
with continuous shaking for 3 d. The aggregation kinetics of α-synuclein was
measured using Thioflavin T staining. The remaining solutions of aggregated
α-synuclein were centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 30 min to separate the
aggregated α-synuclein pellet and nonaggregated α-synuclein supernatant
and were analyzed by Western blot.
MPTP Injection. MPTP (15 mg/kg) was injected s.c., and probenecid (250 mg/kg),
a MPTP clearance inhibitor, was injected i.p. 10 times (every 3.5 d for 5 wk) to
five groups: wild-type mice (n = 7), PIKE-KO mice (n = 7), Fyn-KO mice (n = 8),
wild-type mice injected with AMPK-DN ( n = 8), and Fyn-KO mice injected with
AMPK-DN (n = 8). Control mice for each group (n = 8 in each group) received
saline s.c. and probenecid MPTP i.p.
Cell Quantification. The number of TH+ cells in the substantia nigra and
striatum was estimated by ImageJ software using fluorescence intensity. For
each animal, three consecutive sections of the substantia nigra and striatum
were analyzed. For quantification of LC3-II+ cells, the stained color was selected and set to the proper threshold for the binarization of the selected
color image. The total number of immunoreactive neurons was analyzed using
the same threshold (ImageJ). The investigator was blinded to the conditions of
the analysis.
Statistical Analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using either Student’s
t test (for two-group comparisons) or one-way ANOVA followed by the least
significant difference post hoc test (for comparisons of more than two groups).
Differences with P values less than 0.05 were considered significant.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Dr. Zhijun Luo at Boston University for the
lentivirus construct of dominant-negative AMPK. This work was supported by
Grant 11137 from the Michael J. Fox Foundation (to K.Y.).
1. Olanow CW, Brundin P (2013) Parkinson’s disease and alpha synuclein: Is Parkinson’s
disease a prion-like disorder? Mov Disord 28(1):31–40.
2. Ellis CE, Schwartzberg PL, Grider TL, Fink DW, Nussbaum RL (2001) alpha-synuclein is
phosphorylated by members of the Src family of protein-tyrosine kinases. J Biol Chem
276(6):3879–3884.
3. Nakamura T, Yamashita H, Takahashi T, Nakamura S (2001) Activated Fyn phosphorylates alpha-synuclein at tyrosine residue 125. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
280(4):1085–1092.
4. Okochi M, et al. (2000) Constitutive phosphorylation of the Parkinson’s disease associated alpha-synuclein. J Biol Chem 275(1):390–397.
5. Jiang P, et al. (2013) Adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase overactivation
leads to accumulation of α-synuclein oligomers and decrease of neurites. Neurobiol
Aging 34(5):1504–1515.
6. Chen L, et al. (2009) Tyrosine and serine phosphorylation of alpha-synuclein have opposing effects on neurotoxicity and soluble oligomer formation. J Clin Invest 119(11):
3257–3265.
7. Woods A, et al. (2000) Characterization of the role of AMP-activated protein kinase in
the regulation of glucose-activated gene expression using constitutively active and
dominant negative forms of the kinase. Mol Cell Biol 20(18):6704–6711.
8. Weisová P, et al. (2011) Role of 5′-adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase in
cell survival and death responses in neurons. Antioxid Redox Signal 14(10):1863–1876.
9. McCullough LD, et al. (2005) Pharmacological inhibition of AMP-activated protein
kinase provides neuroprotection in stroke. J Biol Chem 280(21):20493–20502.
10. Ju TC, et al. (2011) Nuclear translocation of AMPK-alpha1 potentiates striatal neurodegeneration in Huntington’s disease. J Cell Biol 194(2):209–227.
11. Lopez-Lopez C, Dietrich MO, Metzger F, Loetscher H, Torres-Aleman I (2007) Disturbed cross talk between insulin-like growth factor I and AMP-activated protein
kinase as a possible cause of vascular dysfunction in the amyloid precursor protein/
presenilin 2 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 27(4):824–831.
12. Ross JM, et al. (2010) High brain lactate is a hallmark of aging and caused by a shift in
the lactate dehydrogenase A/B ratio. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(46):20087–20092.
13. Bowen BC, et al. (1995) Proton MR spectroscopy of the brain in 14 patients with
Parkinson disease. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 16(1):61–68.
14. Koga K, et al. (2006) H MRS identifies lactate rise in the striatum of MPTP-treated
C57BL/6 mice. Eur J Neurosci 23(4):1077–1081.
15. Chen JL, et al. (2010) Lactic acidosis triggers starvation response with paradoxical
induction of TXNIP through MondoA. PLoS Genet 6(9):e1001093.
16. Ye K, Snyder SH (2004) PIKE GTPase: A novel mediator of phosphoinositide signaling.
J Cell Sci 117(Pt 2):155–161.
17. Ye K (2005) PIKE/nuclear PI 3-kinase signaling in preventing programmed cell death.
J Cell Biochem 96(3):463–472.
18. Chan CB, Ye K (2010) Multiple functions of phosphoinositide-3 kinase enhancer
(PIKE). Sci World J 10:613–623.
19. Ye K, et al. (2000) Pike. A nuclear gtpase that enhances PI3kinase activity and is
regulated by protein 4.1N. Cell 103(6):919–930.
20. Ye K, et al. (2002) Phospholipase C gamma 1 is a physiological guanine nucleotide
exchange factor for the nuclear GTPase PIKE. Nature 415(6871):541–544.
21. Rong R, et al. (2003) PI3 kinase enhancer-Homer complex couples mGluRI to PI3 kinase, preventing neuronal apoptosis. Nat Neurosci 6(11):1153–1161.
22. Tang X, et al. (2008) Netrin-1 mediates neuronal survival through PIKE-L interaction
with the dependence receptor UNC5B. Nat Cell Biol 10(6):698–706.
23. Liu Z, et al. (2008) Neuroprotective actions of PIKE-L by inhibition of SET proteolytic
degradation by asparagine endopeptidase. Mol Cell 29(6):665–678.
24. Chan CB, et al. (2011) Phosphoinositide 3-kinase enhancer regulates neuronal dendritogenesis and survival in neocortex. J Neurosci 31(22):8083–8092.
25. Chan CB, et al. (2012) Essential role of PIKE GTPases in neuronal protection against
excitotoxic insults. Adv Biol Regul 52(1):66–76.
26. Chan CB, et al. (2014) PIKE is essential for oligodendroglia development and CNS
myelination. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111(5):1993–1998.
27. Zhang S, et al. (2016) Fyn-phosphorylated PIKE-A binds and inhibits AMPK signaling,
blocking its tumor suppressive activity. Cell Death Differ 23(1):52–63.
28. Chan CB, et al. (2010) Deficiency of phosphoinositide 3-kinase enhancer protects mice
from diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance. Diabetes 59(4):883–893.
29. Yamada E, Pessin JE, Kurland IJ, Schwartz GJ, Bastie CC (2010) Fyn-dependent regulation of energy expenditure and body weight is mediated by tyrosine phosphorylation of LKB1. Cell Metab 11(2):113–124.
30. Przedborski S, Jackson-Lewis V (1998) Mechanisms of MPTP toxicity. Mov Disord 13
(Suppl 1):35–38.
31. Nicotra A, Parvez SH (2000) Cell death induced by MPTP, a substrate for monoamine
oxidase B. Toxicology 153(1-3):157–166.
32. McFarland MA, Ellis CE, Markey SP, Nussbaum RL (2008) Proteomics analysis identifies
phosphorylation-dependent alpha-synuclein protein interactions. Mol Cell Proteomics
7(11):2123–2137.
33. Anglade P, et al. (1997) Apoptosis and autophagy in nigral neurons of patients with
Parkinson’s disease. Histol Histopathol 12(1):25–31.
34. Nicklas WJ, Vyas I, Heikkila RE (1985) Inhibition of NADH-linked oxidation in brain
mitochondria by 1-methyl-4-phenyl-pyridine, a metabolite of the neurotoxin,
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine. Life Sci 36(26):2503–2508.
35. Nicklas WJ, Youngster SK, Kindt MV, Heikkila RE (1987) MPTP, MPP+ and mitochondrial function. Life Sci 40(8):721–729.
36. Devi L, Raghavendran V, Prabhu BM, Avadhani NG, Anandatheerthavarada HK (2008) Mitochondrial import and accumulation of alpha-synuclein impair complex I in human dopaminergic neuronal cultures and Parkinson disease brain. J Biol Chem 283(14):9089–9100.
37. Ahn JY, Hu Y, Kroll TG, Allard P, Ye K (2004) PIKE-A is amplified in human cancers and
prevents apoptosis by up-regulating Akt. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101(18):6993–6998.
38. Yasuda T, Nakata Y, Mochizuki H (2013) α-Synuclein and neuronal cell death. Mol
Neurobiol 47(2):466–483.
39. Kim TW, et al. (2013) (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 and AMP-activated protein kinase
mediate progressive dopaminergic neuronal degeneration in a mouse model of
Parkinson’s disease. Cell Death Dis 4:e919.
40. Li J, Zeng Z, Viollet B, Ronnett GV, McCullough LD (2007) Neuroprotective effects of
adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase inhibition and gene deletion in
stroke. Stroke 38(11):2992–2999.
41. Hu Y, Liu Z, Ye K (2005) Phosphoinositol lipids bind to phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI3)-kinase
enhancer GTPase and mediate its stimulatory effect on PI3-kinase and Akt signalings.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102(46):16853–16858.
42. Jackson-Lewis V, Jakowec M, Burke RE, Przedborski S (1995) Time course and morphology
of dopaminergic neuronal death caused by the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-
tetrahydropyridine. Neurodegeneration 4(3):257–269.
43. Benskey MJ, et al. (2016) Continuous collection of Adeno-Associated Virus from
producer cell medium significantly increases total viral yield. Hum Gene Ther Methods
27(1):32–45.
1188 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1618627114 Kang et al.