Ownership of an artificial limb induced by electrical
brain stimulation
Kelly L. Collinsa,1,2, Arvid Guterstamb,1,2, Jeneva Croninc,d, Jared D. Olsond,e, H. Henrik Ehrssonb,3,
and Jeffrey G. Ojemanna,d,3
a
Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195; b
Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177,
Sweden; c
Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195; d
Center for Sensorimotor Neural Engineering, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98105; and e
Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
Edited by Peter L. Strick, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, and approved November 20, 2016 (received for review October 3, 2016)
Replacing the function of a missing or paralyzed limb with a
prosthetic device that acts and feels like one’s own limb is a major
goal in applied neuroscience. Recent studies in nonhuman primates
have shown that motor control and sensory feedback can be achieved
by connecting sensors in a robotic arm to electrodes implanted in the
brain. However, it remains unknown whether electrical brain stimulation can be used to create a sense of ownership of an artificial limb.
In this study on two human subjects, we show that ownership of an
artificial hand can be induced via the electrical stimulation of the hand
section of the somatosensory (SI) cortex in synchrony with touches
applied to a rubber hand. Importantly, the illusion was not elicited
when the electrical stimulation was delivered asynchronously or to a
portion of the SI cortex representing a body part other than the hand,
suggesting that multisensory integration according to basic spatial
and temporal congruence rules is the underlying mechanism of the
illusion. These findings show that the brain is capable of integrating
“natural” visual input and direct cortical-somatosensory stimulation
to create the multisensory perception that an artificial limb belongs to
one’s own body. Thus, they serve as a proof of concept that electrical
brain stimulation can be used to “bypass” the peripheral nervous
system to induce multisensory illusions and ownership of artificial
body parts, which has important implications for patients who lack
peripheral sensory input due to spinal cord or nerve lesions.
body perception | electrical brain stimulation | neuroprosthetics |
multisensory integration | self
The brain’s ability to distinguish the body from external objects
is important for accurately guiding limb movements (1) and
maintaining our sense of bodily self (2). Therefore, a major endeavor in applied neuroscience relates to creating artificial limb
prostheses that not only move according to the user’s intentions and
relay sensations of touch but that also feel as though they were the
user’s own limbs. Previous work has shown that the so-called rubber
hand illusion, a multisensory perceptual illusion in which the sense
of touch and feelings of ownership are referred to an artificial limb
through the concurrent touching of a rubber hand in view and a
participant’s hidden real hand (3), can be used to induce ownership
sensations of a prosthetic hand in upper limb amputees (4). However, the classical rubber hand illusion requires that touches be delivered to the real hand (3), and previous studies on amputees have
relied on tactile stimulation of the stump (4, 5) or reinnervated regions of the skin (6). Thus, it remains unknown whether it is possible
to induce ownership of an artificial limb in the absence of peripheral
stimulation, which is a highly relevant issue for patients lacking
sensory input due to damage to the spinal cord or peripheral nerves.
Inspired by previous studies in nonhuman primates showing that
sensory feedback from a robotic arm can be administered through
electrodes implanted in the primary somatosensory (SI) cortex (7),
we examined whether electrical brain stimulation could be used to
“bypass” the peripheral nervous system to elicit ownership of an
artificial limb. To this end, we used a modified version of the rubber
hand illusion with direct cortical stimulation in two human subjects
undergoing invasive electrocorticographic (ECoG) monitoring in
preparation for epilepsy surgery. We hypothesized that it would be
possible to induce the same effects as the classical illusion by
electrically stimulating the hand-sensory cortex in synchrony with
touches delivered to the observed rubber hand—without touching
the hidden real hand (Fig. 1). In accordance with our prediction, we
found that illusory ownership of the rubber hand could be consistently induced using electrical brain stimulation of the hand SI
cortex in both subjects. Furthermore, the results show that stimulating the SI cortex asynchronously or in a “non-hand” region did
not elicit the illusion. These findings show that the brain is capable
of integrating electrical cortical-somatosensory and natural visual
signals to form coherent multisensory representations of one’s own
limbs according to the same basic rules of spatiotemporal congruence that govern the normal perception of our body (8). As such,
this study constitutes an important step toward the development of
neuroprosthetic limbs that feel just like real limbs.
Results
Before experimentation, the subjects underwent a sensory stimulation screening process, during which we identified appropriate
electrode pairs and current amplitudes for evoking sensations in
the subjects’ fingers and forearm. We also established a control
electrode pair outside of the SI cortex that was not associated with
somatosensation or any other perceptual phenomena (Fig. 2). Both
subjects reported that the sensations elicited by electrical stimulation of the SI cortex felt “unnatural” and unlike anything they had
ever felt before. However, the evoked sensations were anatomically
well localized. Specifically, subject 1 described the stimulation of the
SI finger site as a “vibration-like” sensation localized on the proximal phalange of the ring finger, whereas subject 2 likened the
Significance
Creating a prosthetic device that feels like one’s own limb is a
major challenge in applied neuroscience. We show that ownership of an artificial hand can be induced via electrical stimulation
of the hand somatosensory cortex in synchrony with touches
applied to a prosthetic hand in full view. These findings suggest
that the human brain can integrate “natural” visual input and
direct cortical-somatosensory stimulation to create the multisensory perception that an artificial limb belongs to one’s own body.
Author contributions: K.L.C., A.G., H.H.E., and J.G.O. designed research; K.L.C., A.G., J.C., J.D.O.,
and J.G.O. performed research; A.G. analyzed data; and K.L.C., A.G., J.C., J.D.O., H.H.E.,
and J.G.O. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1
K.C. and A.G. contributed equally to this work.
2
To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: arvid.guterstam@ki.se or kellyco@u.
washington.edu.
3
H.H.E. and J.G.O contributed equally to this work.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1616305114/-/DCSupplemental.
166–171 | PNAS | January 3, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 1 www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1616305114
evoked sensation to a feeling of “light pressure” along the proximal and middle phalanges of the middle finger (for details, SI
Experimental Procedures).
In the illusion condition (SynchFinger), the onset of a visible
touch on the rubber hand trigged a 500-ms-long electrical stimulation across the electrode pair corresponding to the SI finger site
(Fig. 2, red electrodes). In the AsynchFinger control condition, the
cortical stimulation was delayed by 1,000 ms relative to the visible
rubber hand touch (Fig. S1), while keeping all other experimental
parameters constant. In the SynchWrist control condition, the
cortical stimulation was synchronous with the touch but was applied across an electrode pair corresponding to a spatially incongruent site of the SI cortex (Fig. 2, black electrodes), which was
associated with somatosensation on the distal dorsal region of the
forearm (Fig. 1). The AsynchFinger and SynchWrist conditions
allowed us to investigate whether the illusion is constrained by the
same temporal and spatial multisensory congruence rules that
have been shown to govern the classical rubber hand illusion (8).
In two additional control conditions, we delivered synchronous
stimulation across a pair of control electrodes outside of the SI cortex
(SynchRemote) (Fig. 2, green electrodes) or no stimulation at all
(placebo). The SynchRemote and placebo conditions permitted us to
control for suggestibility and task compliance and to exclude the
possibility that electrical current passing through the dura contributed
to the illusion experience. We aimed at repeating each experimental
condition twice, which was accomplished in subject 2. In subject 1,
however, the experiment was aborted prematurely due to fatigue,
and we were unable to complete the experiment at a later time.
Therefore, we only performed one repetition of the SynchFinger,
AsynchFinger, SynchRemote, and placebo conditions in this subject.
The subjective experience of the illusion was quantified using an
analog rating scale that was reported verbally; more objectively,
the illusion was assessed via behavioral measurements in the form
of pointing errors toward the rubber hand—the so-called proprioceptive drift—in an intermanual pointing task (3). For subject
1, there was a significant effect of condition on the verbal ownership ratings (F = 191.24, P < 0.001, one-way ANOVA; Fig. 3A).
Importantly, the SynchFinger illusion condition was associated
with significantly stronger ownership of the rubber hand compared
with the ratings in the placebo and SynchRemote control conditions (both P < 0.001, paired t tests), suggesting that the illusion
was successfully induced and was dependent on the concurrent
electrical stimulation of the primary somatosensory cortex. Notably, the illusion was very vivid (maximum rating, +3) and featured
a fast onset time (4 s), which was comparable to the vividness (+3)
and onset time (4.2 ± 1.2 s) of the conventional rubber hand illusion induced by visual stimulation of the rubber hand and tactile
stimulation of the real hand (Fig. 3C). In accordance with the
results of the subjective ratings, the proprioceptive drift was
greater in the SynchFinger than in the placebo and SynchRemote
conditions (+10 mm versus −10 and −2 mm; Fig. 3B). The magnitude of the proprioceptive drift in the illusion condition was
comparable to that shown in earlier studies on the rubber hand
illusion (9–11). Unexpectedly, there was no significant difference
between the SynchFinger and AsynchFinger conditions in terms of
ownership ratings (P = 0.33, paired t test; Fig. 3A). However, this
finding was inconsistent with the proprioceptive drift results, which
show a greater drift in the SynchFinger than in the AsynchFinger
condition (10 mm versus −5 mm; Fig. 3B). We therefore speculate
that the high ownership ratings in the AsynchFinger condition in
subject 1 were at least partly related to task compliance and stimulation order effects in the form of increased suggestibility after
having experienced the illusion condition in the preceding trial (the
AsynchFinger condition was repeated immediately after the SynchFinger condition; for details, SI Experimental Procedures) and that
synchronous cortical stimulation is necessary for experiencing a
genuine rubber hand illusion.
Subject 2 displayed a significant effect of condition in terms of
rubber hand ownership ratings (F = 22.49, P < 0.001, one-way
ANOVA; Fig. 3D). The SynchFinger condition was coupled with
significantly higher ownership ratings (all P < 0.001, paired t tests)
and greater proprioceptive drift (64 mm versus 38, −57, 6, and
−22 mm; values correspond to the order of conditions in Fig. 3E)
compared with the drift in each of the four control conditions. In
accordance with the results in subject 1, the illusion vividness
(plateau phase between +1 and +2; Fig. 3D) was comparable to
Fig. 1. Experimental setup. The real hand was hidden from view behind a screen while a prosthetic hand was placed in front of it in full sight of the subject.
To induce the illusion, the experimenter repeatedly stroked a finger of the rubber hand using a digital touch probe that was connected to a cortical
stimulation device, which delivered an electrical current across two subdural electrodes located in the region of the subject’s primary somatosensory (SI)
cortex corresponding to the same finger (red electrodes). In the spatially incongruent control condition, the current was delivered to a pair of electrodes
associated with somatosensation on the subject’s wrist (black electrodes). The skin areas to which this subject (subject 2) referred the stimulation-induced
sensations are indicated in red and black, respectively. Notably, the subject’s real hand was never touched. The green electrodes represent a control stimulation site unassociated with somatosensation.
Collins et al. PNAS | January 3, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 1 | 167
NEUROSCIENCE
the vividness of the conventional rubber hand illusion (+2; Fig.
3F). Interestingly, the illusion onset time for the rubber hand illusion evoked by electrical brain stimulation (6 s) was markedly
faster than the onset for the conventional rubber hand illusion
(20.8 ± 6.8 s). Together, these findings suggest that the illusion
was successfully elicited and was contingent on electrical stimulation of the SI cortex that was spatially and temporally congruent
with the visual stimulation of the rubber hand.
Discussion
In summary, we used a multisensory perceptual illusion and invasive electrophysiological techniques in humans to investigate a
question that is at the heart of applied neuroscience: Can direct
cortical stimulation be used to create the experience that an artificial limb belongs to one’s own body? Our results revealed two
main findings. First, we found that ownership of an artificial limb
can be induced via electrical stimulation of the SI cortex in conjunction with congruent visual signals from a rubber hand being
touched. Second, the results show that the visual stimulus and the
cortical stimulation must obey specific rules of spatial and temporal congruence for the illusion to arise, suggesting that the
human brain is capable of integrating natural visual and electrical
cortical-somatosensory signals to build a coherent multisensory
perception of a seen limb belonging to the self. Thus, our findings
have both theoretical and practical implications because they extend our understanding of the multisensory integration mechanisms underlying bodily self-attribution (8, 12–14), demonstrate
that multisensory illusions can be triggered by electrical brain
stimulation, and provide a method for creating ownership sensations of prosthetic limb devices through direct stimulation of the
somatosensory cortex.
This study allowed us to investigate the hitherto unexplored
relationships between electrical brain stimulation, multisensory
integration, and body ownership. The cortical stimulation used in
our experiment was delivered across two electrodes spaced 10 mm
apart on the surface of the postcentral gyrus, resulting in the simultaneous depolarization of large and functionally heterogeneous
neuronal populations devoted to the processing of multiple different somatosensory modalities. The perceptual correlates of such
large-scale electrical stimulations of the SI cortex are typically
described as unnatural sensations of touch, wind, or numbness and
are difficult to describe in conventional terms (15–17). Indeed,
both of our subjects stated that the stimulation felt unlike anything
they had experienced before and that, even though anatomically
well defined, the sensation did not correspond well with any one
somatosensory modality. The closest descriptors used were that the
sensation had a vibrating (subject 1) or pressure-like quality (subject 2). Despite these highly nonphysiological somatosensory percepts, we were able to elicit a strong rubber hand illusion. In
addition, both subjects spontaneously reported that the sensation
originated from the rubber hand in the illusion condition, which is
equivalent to the referral of touch phenomenon observed in the
classical rubber hand illusion (3). Previous studies have shown that
the integration of visual and tactile signals in multisensory brain
regions is a key mechanism for generating ownership of a seen limb
(10, 18). Our findings therefore support a flexible model of multisensory integration for bodily self-attribution (8, 12–14), which
allows for low-fidelity artificial sensory feedback to be merged with
visual signals from a limb-like object being touched as long as the
stimuli are spatially and temporally matched.
Intriguingly, open-ended explorative testing in subject 2 showed
that his perception of the cortical stimulus was influenced by his
visual experience. When the touches were applied to the rubber
hand as a brushstroke, he experienced the somatosensory stimulus
as moving on the model hand in the same direction as the stroke.
This was also true when the direction of the stroking was reversed.
When the touches were applied in a focal, pressing manner, he felt
a simple “feeling of pressure” in the location where the probe was
touching the rubber hand. We speculate that this phenomenon
represents a cross-modal interaction (19, 20) between vision and
touch in which visual signals from an owned rubber hand affect the
perception of stimulation-induced somatosensation, possibly reflecting top-down modulatory effects on the SI cortex from the multisensory body representation in the intraparietal sulcus (11, 21–23).
Future studies are needed to formally quantify this phenomenon and
examine whether such cross-modal interaction effects are specific to
the context of ownership of the seen limb.
From an applied neuroscience perceptive, our results serve as a
proof of concept that direct cortical stimulation can be used to
create ownership sensations of a prosthetic limb. This represents a
major conceptual advance because all previous studies on prosthesis ownership in amputees have relied on peripheral somatosensory stimulation; either in the form of tactile stimulation of the
stump (4, 5) or a reinnervated patch of skin (6) or, possibly, the
electrical stimulation of cuff electrodes chronically implanted in
peripheral nerves (24, 25). Thus, our results suggest that it is theoretically possible to bypass the peripheral nervous system entirely
via direct cortical stimulation, which would enable patients who
lack afferent input from a damaged or paralyzed limb (e.g., due to
lesions of peripheral nerves or the spinal cord) to experience
Subject 1
Subject 2
SI finger
SI wrist
Remote electrodes Epileptic activity detected
Fig. 2. Brain anatomy and electrode localization. Projections of the electrode grids are relative to the cortical surface in both subjects. The grid was
placed on the right side in subject 1 and on the left in subject 2. The colored
electrodes indicate the different stimulation sites, including the SI finger
(red) and SI wrist representations (black), as well as a nonsomatosensory
control site separate from the SI cortex (green). The crossed-out electrodes
indicate the locations at which epileptic activity was observed (for details, SI
Experimental Procedures). The 3D brain representations were generated
from the subjects’ individual MRI scans.
168 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1616305114 Collins et al.
ownership of a neuroprosthetic device. Moreover, we found that
during the illusion condition, the stimulation-induced somatic
sensations were referred to the specific part of the prosthesis being
touched, rather than being referred to the real limb or a phantom
limb as shown in earlier somatosensory cortical stimulation experiments (15, 26, 27). This feature has important practical implications because such somatosensory referral would not only
make a prosthesis feel more natural but could also provide
meaningful sensory feedback for dexterous hand actions performed
by robotic hands. However, because the spinal cord and peripheral
nervous system were intact in our subjects, we cannot exclude the
possibility that static proprioceptive information from the real hand
plays a role in generating the present illusion. This issue could be
examined in future studies of patients lacking afferent proprioceptive signals from a hand, for instance, due to limb amputation, spinal cord injury, or subcortical stroke. Based on the earlier
findings showing that upper limb amputees are capable of experiencing the classical rubber hand illusion (4), we hypothesize that
the present ECoG-stimulation version of the illusion will also be
inducible in absence of proprioceptive information from the hand.
From an engineering standpoint, it is encouraging that the
relatively low-fidelity sensory feedback associated with ECoG
stimulation was sufficient to elicit ownership sensations and the
referral of tactile percepts to the rubber hand, and that the illusion
vividness was comparable even to the conventional rubber hand
illusion induced by tactile stimulation of the real hand. Subdural
electrode arrays have some advantages for long-term implantation
over fine-wire intracortical electrodes, as they are less invasive and
provide a more stable signal over time at the cost of poorer spatial
resolution (28). The results of microstimulation studies in monkeys (29–33) and a recent study in one human participant (34)
suggest that intracortical microstimulation of the SI cortex provides more natural sensations of touch localized to substantially
smaller areas of the skin. However, we speculate that the crossmodal interaction effect discussed above could potentially be
exploited to increase the diversity of somatosensory percepts induced by ECoG stimulations of the SI cortex.
Finally, the present study demonstrates that a multisensory illusion can be elicited by substituting one sensory modality with
direct cortical stimulation in humans. Our results suggest that
relatively coarse, electrically induced signals from one sensory
modality can be integrated with natural high-quality signals from
another modality to produce a coherent multisensory percept,
provided that the basic multisensory principles of temporal and
spatial congruence are obeyed (35). We speculate that the integration of natural and artificial sensory signals takes place at the
level of multisensory areas in the association cortex, although future neurophysiological studies are needed to characterize these
underlying processes. Furthermore, we hypothesize that other
multisensory illusions will also be inducible via electrical brain
stimulation, which could have important implications for the
development of neurocognitive prosthetic devices. For instance, it
may be possible to facilitate the localization of sound via artificial
vision (the ventriloquist illusion) (36, 37) produced through visual
SynchFinger (SF) AsynchFinger (AF) Placebo (P) SynchRemote (SR)
+3
+2
+1
0
-2
-1
-3
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60
Time point (s)
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15 SF
SyncWrist (SW)
AF P SR
A B
SF AF P SR
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
Proprioceptive drift (cm)
E
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 SW
+3
+2
+1
0
-2
-1
-3
Ownership rating
DOwnership rating
Proprioceptive drift (mm)
+3
+2
+1
0
-2
-1
-3
CSubjective rating
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Rotated
+3
+2
+1
0
-2
-1
-3
FSubjective rating
“It felt as if the rubber
hand were my hand”
Control statement
Conventional rubber hand illusion
Fig. 3. Results. The illusion was quantified using continuous verbal ownership ratings in combination with the measurement of pointing errors toward the
rubber hand in an intermanual reaching task (proprioceptive drift) (3, 9). The reaching task was performed immediately before and after each block of stimulation, and the proprioceptive drift was defined as the difference between the before and after measurements, with positive values indicating a drift in the
direction toward the rubber hand. (A–C) Subject 1. In accordance with our a priori hypothesis, the results show that the SynchFinger illusion condition generated
significantly higher ratings of rubber hand ownership than the SynchRemote and placebo control conditions (P < 0.001; A), and the proprioceptive drift was
greater in the SynchFinger condition than in either of the control conditions (B). The conventional rubber hand illusion, induced by visual stimulation of the
rubber hand and tactile stimulation of the real hand, was associated with an ownership rating of +3 (C), which was similar to the electrical stimulation-induced
version of the illusion (A). It should be noted that subject 1 aborted the experiment prematurely due to fatigue and each condition was therefore only repeated
once. (D–F) Subject 2. The results show that the SynchFinger condition was associated with significantly higher ownership ratings (P < 0.001; D) and a greater
proprioceptive drift (E) compared with the results of the four control conditions. The conventional rubber hand illusion was associated with an ownership rating
of +2 (F), which is in accordance with the electrical stimulation-induced version of the illusion (D). These results are compatible with those of subject 1 and
reinforce the conclusion that the illusion is dependent on spatial and temporal congruence between the visual signals from the rubber hand being touched and
the cortical stimulation of the SI cortex, and that it is at least as strong as the conventional rubber hand illusion. The error bars represent the SEM.
Collins et al. PNAS | January 3, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 1 | 169
NEUROSCIENCE
cortical stimulation (38) or enhance speech comprehension based
on seeing the movements of lips (the McGurk illusion) (39, 40)
when using an auditory prosthesis based on brain stimulation (41).
In conclusion, this study demonstrates that electrical brain
stimulation in humans can be used to manipulate a fundamental
aspect of self-consciousness: the feeling that the body belongs to
the self. Our findings provide a conceptually important step toward achieving a robotic prosthesis that not only moves and
provides sensory feedback via electrodes implanted in the brain
(7, 42, 43) but also feels just like one’s own limb.
Experimental Procedures
Patients. The experiments were performed at Harborview Medical Center,
Seattle, WA. Two patients, one 19-y-old female (subject 1) and one 33-y-old
male (subject 2), with medically refractory focal epilepsy undergoing presurgical
invasive seizure monitoring volunteered for this research study. Informed
consent was obtained, with all procedures approved by the University of
Washington Institutional Review Board. Both patients were implanted, solely
for clinical purposes, with a 64-electrode grid array featuring coverage of the
right (subject 1) or left (subject 2) SI cortex at the level of the representation of
the hand (Fig. 2).
Experimental Setup. During the experiment, the subjects rested in their
hospital beds with the head of the bed angled at ∼45°. A mobile bedside table
was positioned above their waist. Their left (subject 1) or right (subject 2) arm
was hidden behind a screen, while a lifelike rubber hand was placed in front of
the screen in full view (Fig. 1). To induce the illusion, a digital touch probe (Fig.
S2 and SI Experimental Procedures for hardware specifics) was used to repeatedly deliver touches (at the frequency 0.5 Hz) to the rubber hand for a
period of 60 s. The touch probe triggered a cortical stimulation device to
deliver electrical pulses to the hand SI cortex. In subject 1, we applied 500-mslong strokes along the proximal phalange of the ring finger of the rubber
hand. Because subject 2 described a sense of pressure associated with the SI
cortex stimulation, instead of stroking, we applied the touch probe in a focal
manner, pressing on the proximal phalange of the rubber hand’s middle finger for 500 ms every 2 s. The sequence of the touches delivered to the rubber
hand was identical across all five conditions (Fig. S3 for touch probe results),
and the experimenter delivering the touches was blind with respect to the
nature of the experimental conditions of interest.
Illusion Quantification. During each 60-s experimental block, we instructed the
subjects to verbally report the current vividness of the illusion in response to a
cue that was presented every 4 s (every 2 s for subject 2; SI Experimental
Procedures for details). The subjects were asked to report their level of
agreement to the statement “It feels as if the rubber hand were my hand,”
using a scale ranging from −3, “I completely disagree,” to +3, “I completely
agree,” with 0 indicating, “I neither agree nor disagree.” An intermanual
reaching task was performed immediately before and after each experimental
block, in which the subjects were temporarily blindfolded and asked to point
to the location of their left (subject 1) or right index finger (subject 2) using the
opposite hand. The proprioceptive drift, which is an established behavioral
proxy of illusory body ownership (3, 9), was defined as the difference between
the before and after measurements, with positive values indicating a drift in
the direction toward the rubber hand. SI Experimental Procedures provides
further details on the experimental procedures and statistical analyses.
The Conventional Rubber Hand Illusion. To examine potential similarities between the rubber hand illusion elicited by electrical stimulation of the SI
cortex and tactile stimulation of the real hand, we conducted a separate experiment on a different day in which we exposed the subjects to the conventional rubber hand illusion (3). The illusion was induced using previously
published standard procedures (3, 9, 18), which involved the synchronous
stroking of a rubber hand and the subject’s real hand for a period of 60 s.
Asynchronous stroking (temporal incongruence) or synchronous stroking of a
rubber hand rotated through 180° (spatial incongruence) served as control
conditions (3, 18). The illusion strength was quantified immediately after each
experimental condition by asking the subjects to rate the statement “It felt as
if the rubber hand were my hand,” using a scale ranging from −3 to +3 (i.e.,
the same statement and scale as in the electrical brain stimulation experiment). The participants were also asked to rate a control statement, “It
seemed as if the touch I were feeling came from somewhere between my own
hand and the rubber hand” (adopted from ref. 3). We compared the difference in rating between the illusion and control statements to control
for suggestibility and task compliance. The questionnaire results are
shown in Fig. 3 C and F. The average illusion onset time was estimated in
four separate repetitions of synchronous stroking in which the subjects
were instructed to press a button as soon as they started experiencing
ownership of the rubber hand.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The authors acknowledge the patients who have so
generously given their time during a period of significant personal difficulty;
the clinical staff at Harborview Medical Center; previous members of the
Ojemann research group, who have developed some of the experimental
infrastructure that contributed to this project; and Martti Mercurio, who
developed the digital touch probes. Funding was provided by NIH
NS065186 and NIH NS079200; National Science Foundation (NSF) EEC1028725, NSF DGE-1256082, NSF IIS-1514790, and 2K12HD001097; The Swedish Research Council; the James McDonnell Foundation; Torsten Söderbergs
Stiftelse; Riksbanken Jubileumsfond; the Promobilia Foundation (A.G.); the
Swedish Society for Medical Research (A.G.); Stockholm Brain Institute (A.G.);
and the Swedish Society of Medicine (A.G.).
1. Graziano M, Botvinick M (2002) How the brain represents the body: insights from
neurophysiology and psychology in Common Mechanisms in Perception and Action:
Attention and Performance XIX, eds Prinz W, Hommel B (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford),
pp 136–157.
2. Merleau-Ponty M (1945) Phénoménologie de la Perception (Gallimard, Paris).
3. Botvinick M, Cohen J (1998) Rubber hands ‘feel’ touch that eyes see. Nature 391(6669):
756.
4. Ehrsson HH, et al. (2008) Upper limb amputees can be induced to experience a rubber
hand as their own. Brain 131(Pt 12):3443–3452.
5. Schmalzl L, et al. (2011) “Pulling telescoped phantoms out of the stump”: Manipulating the perceived position of phantom limbs using a full-body illusion. Front Hum
Neurosci 5:121.
6. Marasco PD, Kim K, Colgate JE, Peshkin MA, Kuiken TA (2011) Robotic touch shifts
perception of embodiment to a prosthesis in targeted reinnervation amputees. Brain
134(Pt 3):747–758.
7. O’Doherty JE, et al. (2011) Active tactile exploration using a brain-machine-brain interface. Nature 479(7372):228–231.
8. Makin TR, Holmes NP, Ehrsson HH (2008) On the other hand: Dummy hands and
peripersonal space. Behav Brain Res 191(1):1–10.
9. Tsakiris M, Haggard P (2005) The rubber hand illusion revisited: Visuotactile integration and self-attribution. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 31(1):80–91.
10. Brozzoli C, Gentile G, Ehrsson HH (2012) That’s near my hand! Parietal and premotor
coding of hand-centered space contributes to localization and self-attribution of the
hand. J Neurosci 32(42):14573–14582.
11. Guterstam A, Gentile G, Ehrsson HH (2013) The invisible hand illusion: Multisensory
integration leads to the embodiment of a discrete volume of empty space. J Cogn
Neurosci 25(7):1078–1099.
12. Ehrsson HH (2012) The concept of body ownership and its relation to multisensory
integration. The Handbook of Multisensory Processes, ed Stein B (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
13. Blanke O (2012) Multisensory brain mechanisms of bodily self-consciousness. Nat Rev
Neurosci 13(8):556–571.
14. Tsakiris M (2010) My body in the brain: A neurocognitive model of body-ownership.
Neuropsychologia 48(3):703–712.
15. Johnson LA, et al. (2013) Direct electrical stimulation of the somatosensory cortex in
humans using electrocorticography electrodes: A qualitative and quantitative report.
J Neural Eng 10(3):036021.
16. Ray PG, et al. (1999) Physiology of perception: Cortical stimulation and recording in
humans. Neurology 52(5):1044–1049.
17. Cronin J, et al. (July 18, 2016) Task-specific somatosensory feedback via cortical
stimulation in humans. IEEE Trans Haptics, 10.1109/toh.2016.2591952.
18. Ehrsson HH, Spence C, Passingham RE (2004) That’s my hand! Activity in premotor
cortex reflects feeling of ownership of a limb. Science 305(5685):875–877.
19. Macaluso E, Frith CD, Driver J (2000) Modulation of human visual cortex by crossmodal spatial attention. Science 289(5482):1206–1208.
20. Driver J, Noesselt T (2008) Multisensory interplay reveals crossmodal influences on
‘sensory-specific’ brain regions, neural responses, and judgments. Neuron 57(1):
11–23.
21. Guterstam A, Björnsdotter M, Gentile G, Ehrsson HH (2015) Posterior cingulate cortex
integrates the senses of self-location and body ownership. Curr Biol 25(11):
1416–1425.
22. Graziano MS, Cooke DF, Taylor CS (2000) Coding the location of the arm by sight.
Science 290(5497):1782–1786.
23. Guterstam A, et al. (2015) Decoding illusory self-location from activity in the human
hippocampus. Front Hum Neurosci 9:412.
24. Ortiz-Catalan M, Håkansson B, Brånemark R (2014) An osseointegrated human-machine gateway for long-term sensory feedback and motor control of artificial limbs.
Sci Transl Med 6(257):257re6.
25. Tan DW, et al. (2014) A neural interface provides long-term stable natural touch
perception. Sci Transl Med 6(257):257ra138.
170 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1616305114 Collins et al.
26. Ojemann JG, Silbergeld DL (1995) Cortical stimulation mapping of phantom limb
rolandic cortex. Case report. J Neurosurg 82(4):641–644.
27. Penfield W, Boldrey E (1937) Somatic motor and sensory representation in the cerebral cortex of man as studied by electrical stimulation. Brain 60(4):389–443.
28. Moran D (2010) Evolution of brain-computer interface: Action potentials, local field
potentials and electrocorticograms. Curr Opin Neurobiol 20(6):741–745.
29. Romo R, Hernández A, Zainos A, Brody CD, Lemus L (2000) Sensing without touching:
Psychophysical performance based on cortical microstimulation. Neuron 26(1):
273–278.
30. Romo R, Hernández A, Zainos A, Salinas E (1998) Somatosensory discrimination based
on cortical microstimulation. Nature 392(6674):387–390.
31. Tabot GA, et al. (2013) Restoring the sense of touch with a prosthetic hand through a
brain interface. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(45):18279–18284.
32. Berg JA, et al. (2013) Behavioral demonstration of a somatosensory neuroprosthesis.
IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 21(3):500–507.
33. Klaes C, et al. (2014) A cognitive neuroprosthetic that uses cortical stimulation for
somatosensory feedback. J Neural Eng 11(5):056024.
34. Flesher SN, et al. (2016) Intracortical microstimulation of human somatosensory cortex. Sci Transl Med 8(361):361ra141.
35. Stein BE, Stanford TR (2008) Multisensory integration: Current issues from the perspective of the single neuron. Nat Rev Neurosci 9(4):255–266.
36. Howard IP, Templeton WB (1966) Human Spatial Orientation (Wiley, New York).
37. Berger CC, Ehrsson HH (2014) The fusion of mental imagery and sensation in the
temporal association cortex. J Neurosci 34(41):13684–13692.
38. Normann RA, et al. (2009) Toward the development of a cortically based visual
neuroprosthesis. J Neural Eng 6(3):035001.
39. McGurk H, MacDonald J (1976) Hearing lips and seeing voices. Nature 264(5588):
746–748.
40. Beauchamp MS, Nath AR, Pasalar S (2010) fMRI-Guided transcranial magnetic stimulation reveals that the superior temporal sulcus is a cortical locus of the McGurk
effect. J Neurosci 30(7):2414–2417.
41. Rauschecker JP, Shannon RV (2002) Sending sound to the brain. Science 295(5557):
1025–1029.
42. Hochberg LR, et al. (2006) Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices by a human with tetraplegia. Nature 442(7099):164–171.
43. Carmena JM, et al. (2003) Learning to control a brain-machine interface for reaching
and grasping by primates. PLoS Biol 1(2):E42.
44. Rohde M, Di Luca M, Ernst MO (2011) The Rubber Hand Illusion: Feeling of ownership
and proprioceptive drift do not go hand in hand. PLoS One 6(6):e21659.
45. Abdulkarim Z, Ehrsson HH (2016) No causal link between changes in hand position
sense and feeling of limb ownership in the rubber hand illusion. Atten Percept
Psychophys 78(2):707–720.
46. Guterstam A, Zeberg H, Özçiftci VM, Ehrsson HH (2016) The magnetic touch illusion: A
perceptual correlate of visuo-tactile integration in peripersonal space. Cognition 155:
44–56.
47. Gentile G, Guterstam A, Brozzoli C, Ehrsson HH (2013) Disintegration of multisensory
signals from the real hand reduces default limb self-attribution: An fMRI study.
J Neurosci 33(33):13350–13366.
48. Wander JD, et al. (2013) Distributed cortical adaptation during learning of a braincomputer interface task. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(26):10818–10823.
49. Hermes D, Miller KJ, Noordmans HJ, Vansteensel MJ, Ramsey NF (2010) Automated
electrocorticographic electrode localization on individually rendered brain surfaces.
J Neurosci Methods 185(2):293–298.
Collins et al. PNAS | January 3, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 1 | 171
NEUROSCIENCE