nature neuroscience • volume 3 no 3 • march 2000 231
During development of the central nervous system, a mass of
undifferentiated cells develops into a precisely organized system
that acquires information, processes that information and uses it
to generate appropriate behavior. Formation of central chemical
synapses, an important part of this self-organization, is poorly
understood. Here we take advantage of the small size, optical
transparency and rapid development of the zebrafish (Danio rerio)
to study central synaptogenesis in an intact vertebrate embryo.
The Mauthner cells (M-cells) are large, paired, identified hindbrain neurons that are well characterized in the teleost fishes1–7 and
can be identified on the basis of size, position and morphology4,5
(Fig. 1a and b). The M-cells mediate the escape response, a rapid
movement away from auditory, vibrational or tactile stimuli1,2,7.
Each M-cell axon crosses the ventral midline to extend down the
contralateral spinal cord to synapse on primary motor neurons
(Pmns) in each spinal hemisegment2,7 (Fig. 1a and c). Serially
repeating, bilaterally paired sets of three primary motor neurons,
the RoP (rostral primary), MiP (middle primary) and CaP (caudal primary)8–11, are activated during the escape reflex and fast
swimming12. In goldfish and tench, the M-cell–Pmn synapse forms
between a dorsal collateral of the M-cell axon and a spine-like structure on the ‘ventral dendrite’ of the Pmn2,13,14 (Fig. 1d).
Time-lapse imaging in vivo is used to study growth cone
dynamics and axonal pathfinding of the retinotectal projections
in Xenopus laevis15–19 and zebrafish20, innervation of axial muscle
by the Pmns11 and embryonic olfactory neuron pathfinding in
zebrafish21, as well as the effect of collapsin 1 on sensory neuron
growth cones22; however, these studies do not address the dynamics of pre- or postsynaptic cells as they contact one another.
During synapse formation in vitro, dendritic filopodia of central neurons show rapid and extensive dynamics23,24, suggesting an
active role in synaptogenesis. The number of filopodia gradually decreases as the number of dendritic spines increases, suggesting that filopodia may represent precursors to the more stable
spines23,24. However, even in a tissue slice, the similarity of events
in culture to those in an intact, developing organism is unknown.
Analysis of brain development in vivo involving mainly electron
microscopy (EM) reveals many synapses on dendritic filopodia25–27; however, such static studies do not reveal cellular dynamics or detailed interactions between cells.
We used time-lapse confocal laser-scanning microscopy and
two-photon laser-scanning microscopy of neurons labeled in living zebrafish embryos to characterize the cell motility events
involved in making initial contacts. We found that the Mauthner growth cone moved rapidly and relatively smoothly down the
spinal cord and seemed to interact transiently with successive
target cells. Primary motor neurons interacted with the nearby
axon via dynamic filopodia. These findings are consistent with
an active involvement of both pre- and postsynaptic elements in
establishing synaptic contacts. In addition, regularly spaced varicosities formed along the Mauthner axon in close proximity to
motor neurons; these varicosities may represent nascent presynaptic boutons.
RESULTS
Growth of the Mauthner cell axon
To observe migration of the M-cell growth cone down the spinal
cord, lipophilic dye, DiD (confocal imaging) or DiO (two-photon imaging)28, was iontophoretically applied to the cell bodies of the M-cell 18–20 hours after fertilization (Fig. 1b).
Consistent with estimations from fixed embryos5,9, the Mauthner growth cone moved at a mean rate of 99.6 ± 22.7 µm per
hour (n = 12, ~28°C; Fig. 2). In general, the Mauthner growth
cone moved smoothly and steadily, but time-lapse sequences
variably showed slowing or brief pauses every 10–15 µm; these
were more pronounced in some cases (Fig. 2b, top and middle) than in others (Fig. 2b, bottom). In all sequences examined, varicosities formed with variable timing along the nascent
axon (Fig. 2c), often just behind the growth cone but not always
in sequence. Thus, as it moved, the growth cone seemed to leave
a trail of axonal thickenings spaced at 13.5 ± 4.3 µm (67 varicosities from 6 axons).
articles
Growth cone and dendrite dynamics
in zebrafish embryos: early events in
synaptogenesis imaged in vivo
James D. Jontes, JoAnn Buchanan and Stephen J. Smith
Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305-5435, USA
Correspondence should be addressed to S.J.S. (sjsmith@leland.stanford.edu)
We used time-lapse fluorescence microscopy to observe the growth of Mauthner cell axons and their
postsynaptic targets, the primary motor neurons, in spinal cords of developing zebrafish embryos.
Upon reaching successive motor neurons, the Mauthner growth cone paused briefly before continuing along its path. Varicosities formed at regular intervals and were preferentially associated with
the target regions of the primary motor neurons. In addition, the postsynaptic motor neurons
showed highly dynamic filopodia, which transiently interacted with both the growth cone and the
axon. Both Mauthner cell and motor neurons were highly active, each showing motility sufficient to
initiate synaptogenesis.
© 2000 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
© 2000 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com