Multiple-scale neuroendocrine signals connect brain
and pituitary hormone rhythms
Nicola Romanòa,1,2, Anne Guilloua
, David J. Hodsonb,c, Agnès O Martina
, and Patrice Mollarda,2
a
Institute of Functional Genomics (IGF), CNRS, INSERM, University of Montpellier, F-34094 Montpellier, France; b
Institute of Metabolism and Systems
Research and Centre of Membrane Proteins and Receptors, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston B15 2TT, United Kingdom; and c
Centre for Endocrinology,
Diabetes and Metabolism, Birmingham Health Partners, Birmingham B15 2TH, United Kingdom
Edited by Donald W. Pfaff, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, and approved January 17, 2017 (received for review October 12, 2016)
Small assemblies of hypothalamic “parvocellular” neurons release their
neuroendocrine signals at the median eminence (ME) to control longlasting pituitary hormone rhythms essential for homeostasis. How such
rapid hypothalamic neurotransmission leads to slowly evolving hormonal signals remains unknown. Here, we show that the temporal
organization of dopamine (DA) release events in freely behaving animals relies on a set of characteristic features that are adapted to the
dynamic dopaminergic control of pituitary prolactin secretion, a key
reproductive hormone. First, locally generated DA release signals are
organized over more than four orders of magnitude (0.001 Hz–10 Hz).
Second, these DA events are finely tuned within and between frequency domains as building blocks that recur over days to weeks. Third,
an integration time window is detected across the ME and consists of
high-frequency DA discharges that are coordinated within the minutes
range. Thus, a hierarchical combination of time-scaled neuroendocrine
signals displays local–global integration to connect brain–pituitary
rhythms and pace hormone secretion.
dopamine | prolactin | rhythms | hypothalamus | neuronal networks
Aremarkable function of the brain is its capability to integrate
temporal information with complex physiological responses.
This has been well established for behavioral responses such as
nonrapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, where three neuronal oscillations with distinct frequency bands support information transfer
(1). However, the neuronal mechanisms that orchestrate the dialogue
between the brain and other basic functions like reproduction, lactation, and growth remain largely unknown (2–5). They depend on
the fine tuning of pituitary hormone pulses by small assemblies of
hypothalamic neuroendocrine or parvocellular neurons that release
specific secretagogues at the median eminence (ME) (4, 6).
Here, we took advantage of the anatomical organization of the
ME to investigate how the tuberoinfundibular (TIDA) neuronal
population (7, 8) releases dopamine (DA) to negatively regulate
pituitary secretion of prolactin (PRL), a key reproductive hormone (2). To do so, miniaturized amperometric carbon fiber implants were used to detect DA release events (9) for days to weeks
in freely behaving mice. Using this approach, we uncovered a hierarchically organized delivery of release events over four orders
of magnitude (from <0.1 s to several hours), which correlate with
the dynamics of PRL in the bloodstream.
Results
Frequency Coding of DA Release Events in Vivo. To characterize the
release dynamics of TIDA nerve terminals in vivo, we used longterm constant voltage amperometry in awake mice using thin (30-μm
tip diameter) carbon fibers implanted into the ME (Fig. 1A). Voltage was clamped at −700 mV to allow detection of DA released
from TIDA neurons. DA amperometry was performed continuously
during several days, and the relationship with PRL secretion was
assessed using tail blood microsampling for high-sensitivity mouse
(m)PRL ELISA developed in-house (10) (Fig. 1A). Single carbon
fiber electrode recordings revealed robust DA currents [median 325
nA, interquartile range (IQR): 127–822 nA] due to oxidation of DA
to dopamine-o-quinone (Fig. 1A), and these could be robustly
detected over the long term (Fig. 1B) (n = 7 virgin female mice). We
then used DA as a relevant readout to explore the dynamics of
TIDA neuron population function in freely behaving animals. DA
currents at the ME level discharged over different timescales (Fig. 1
B and C) and more frequently during the night than day (Fig. 1D)
(mean counts per hour from zeitgeber (ZT) 0, in 6 h blocks: 18.7,
27.2, 28.6, and 30.4), implying that the strength of TIDA neuron
excitability is likely modular around the day/night switch. DA release
events were often grouped and interspaced by long-lasting (dozens
of minutes to several hours) silent periods, suggesting nested relations between high- and low-frequency output patterns (Fig. 1 B
and C). No clear association between DA current density and
estrus cycle stage was detected (Fig. 1C and Fig. S1).
Analysis of interevent intervals (IEI) for DA release unveiled a
wide range of time intervals, from less than 100 ms to a few hours,
with two principal frequencies of 1.5 Hz and 12 Hz (Fig. 1E).
Elevated release from TIDA neurons corresponded with periods
of lowered PRL concentration (Fig. 1F). A delay of several minutes between decreasing PRL levels and the onset of high-frequency DA release events was also observed following exogenous
PRL injection (Fig. 1G), and these occurred at similar frequencies
(0.9 Hz and 17 Hz) (Fig. 1H) to those recorded during spontaneous activity (Fig. 1E). Notably, this response outlasted the decrease in PRL levels (Fig. S2), supporting a role for persistent PRL
receptor signaling (2, 11, 12) or other mediators (13–15) in the
generation of high-frequency DA release events.
Significance
The hypothalamo–pituitary axis controls a wide range of homeostatic processes, including growth, stress, and reproduction. Despite
this fact, the hypothalamic neuron firing patterns that lead to
slowly evolving pituitary hormone rhythms remain enigmatic. Here,
we used in vivo amperometric recordings in freely behaving mice to
investigate how tuberoinfundibular neurons release dopamine (DA)
at the median eminence (ME) to control pituitary prolactin secretion. Using this approach, we show that DA release occurs as
multiple locally generated and time-scaled secretory events, which
are integrated over a range of minutes across the ME. These results
provide a broad physiological mechanism for the dialogue that
occurs between the brain and pituitary to dictate hormone rhythms
over multiple timescales, from ultradian to seasonal.
Author contributions: N.R., A.O.M., and P.M. designed research; N.R. and A.G. performed
research; N.R., D.J.H., A.O.M., and P.M. analyzed data; and N.R., D.J.H., A.O.M., and P.M.
wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1
Present address: Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh
EH8 9XD, UK.
2
To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: Patrice.Mollard@igf.cnrs.fr or nicola.
romano@ed.ac.uk.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1616864114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1616864114 PNAS | February 28, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 9 | 2379–2382
NEUROSCIENCE
Conversely, the arrest of high-frequency DA release events was
followed a few minutes later by an increase in PRL levels (Fig. 1 F
and I), resembling the previously described responses to administration of a D2 receptor antagonist (10). Thus, the TIDA neuron
population has the capability to generate bouts of DA release
events at relatively high frequencies (hertz range), which are inversely correlated with PRL levels in the bloodstream of freely
moving mice. We were also able to record these episodic highfrequency DA events over a number of days during lactation (Fig. S3),
although their amplitude and frequency were lower, most likely due to
the reported loss of DA granular content at this time (9).
Long-Range Organization of DA Release Events at the Local ME Level.
We next examined whether these subsecond DA release events
possess a secondary/tertiary organization at the local level, i.e., in
the close vicinity of carbon fiber tips. Using cluster analysis to
group DA currents on the basis of their shape, and bootstrapping
to identify temporal series of events appearing with a higherthan-chance frequency during the recording period, a specific
distribution could be revealed. In six of the seven recorded mice,
several repetitive patterns of DA release events were found, with
stereotypical features remaining consistent between different
animals recorded on different days (Fig. 2A and Fig. S4).
Further analyses demonstrated that these stereotyped patterns
of DA release were not randomly distributed, but rather
appeared as chains of sequential events within the same group
and/or between groups (Fig. 2 B–E). These recurrent motifs of
DA release events were scaled from the millisecond (Fig. 2 B–D)
right up to the hour (Fig. 2E) range, and could even be detected
over days (Fig. 2 F–I). Thus, the mechanisms controlling TIDA
neuron activities appear to be inherently robust.
Local–Global Integration of DA Release Events Across the Median
Eminence. A long-standing question regarding parvocellular
neuron function is how nerve terminals discharge their neurohormones across the ME to sculpt pituitary output (2–4, 6).
Given that TIDA nerve terminals abut over the whole ME (7, 8),
dual-carbon fiber recordings were carried out 500 μm apart
rostrocaudally, spanning the population (n = 3 animals).
Whereas distant DA events at high frequencies (≥1 Hz) were not
synchronized (Fig. 3A), DA events were coordinated with IEIs in
the minutes range during most of the recordings (Fig. 3 B and C).
This temporal coordination was not seen when each electrode
was considered separately (Fig. 3D), suggesting that it is not
simply due to hypothalamic PRL feedback, but rather effects on
TIDA neuron interactions. Frequencies of 1.39 ± 0.12 Hz and
Fig. 1. In vivo monitoring of DA release events at the median eminence (ME) level. (A) Electrodes were implanted at the ME of mice and dopamine (DA) was detected
using constant voltage amperometry. Serial blood microsampling was performed from the tail vein. (B) Representative 24-h recording of DA release (Top, shaded area is
lights out), with zoom of a 10-min sequence (Bottom). (C) Representative 11-d recording from a female mouse. Each vertical line corresponds to a single secretion event.
The stage of the estrus cycle is indicated on the Left for each day (M, metestrus; D, diestrus; P, proestrus, E, estrus). (D) Mean distribution of DA release events during the day
(n = 80 d from seven female mice). (E) Histogram of interevent intervals (IEIs): two prominent frequencies are apparent at 1.5 and 12 Hz (n = 80 d, from seven female mice).
(F) Relation between DA and PRL. Average normalized PRL levels occurring around a DA event (n = 501 DA events, from six 1-h long sessions) (black, mean; blue, SEM).
(G) DA secretory response to an i.p. injection of 1 μg ovine PRL (PRL injected at time 0) (from five animals, seven injections). (H) Distribution of the IEIs of DA events induced
by i.p. injection of PRL. (I) Example of simultaneous recording of PRL levels (red) and DA release events (black). In all cases, bar graphs show the mean ± SEM.
2380 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1616864114 Romanò et al.
10.08 ± 2.6 Hz were both present during the dual electrode recordings of coordinated DA release events (n = 6) (Fig. 3 E and
F). Such spatial organization strengthens the view of a large-scale
coordination within the TIDA neuron population, which may
provide a means for transforming short-lived hypothalamic signals into long-lasting inputs for downstream endocrine targets.
Discussion
Our results show how an ensemble of parvocellular TIDA neurons delivers its neuroendocrine products toward ME portal
vessels in a freely behaving mouse model. DA release events are
repeated over weeks as network-driven rhythms that cover more
than four orders of magnitude of frequency, from infraslow
(<0.001 Hz) to fast rhythms (1–10 Hz). This organization occurs
not only locally within, but also across the TIDA neuron assembly, as DA release events are scaled over the minute range
throughout the ME (Fig. 4).
Specifically, the use of miniaturized carbon fibers stereotaxically implanted into the ME allowed us to detect and discriminate DA-related currents in vivo, which were far more complex,
but also more organized than spike firing activities recorded in
parvocellular neurons from either brain slices (9, 14–17) or
anesthetized animals (18). Even though the small tip of the
carbon fiber was likely able to detect DA release from only a few
TIDA neurons, we observed a variety of rhythms. First, highfrequency (about 1 and 10 Hz) events were prominent locally but
not synchronized globally. As the site of recording is variable and
these rhythms were observed in all animals, a large number of
local DA release processes presumably originate from TIDA
neurons capable of secreting at high rates. The latter would be
considered as “executive” in the top-down control of pituitary
PRL rhythms by hypothalamic DA inputs, because they
coincided with drops in pituitary PRL secretion. Second, slower
rhythms of DA release (with time periods of minutes to hours) were
detectable locally due to the ability of small carbon fibers to measure DA events over days to weeks with no noticeable deleterious
effects. Strikingly, these were not distinguishable from high-frequency
DA events with which a hierarchal combination occurred regarding
both the specific frequencies generated and how they organize in
time as temporal motifs. Because the local–global integration of highfrequency DA events occurred over frequencies of one or more
minutes across the ME, slow rhythms may orchestrate the delivery of
longer, but highly ordered DA outputs from the TIDA neuron
assembly toward the pituitary responder.
The current study performed in freely behaving animals poses the
question of how the TIDA neuronal network generates such a hierarchal organization of DA release events in vivo. Whereas classical PRL feedback (2) is able to account for a proportion of the
Fig. 2. Temporal patterning of DA release events. (A) Distribution of IEIs for
each class of event obtained after clustering all events from one recording by
shape (n = 13,541). Insets show average event shape in each group; the proportion of each class is shown near each graph. (B–E) Example of temporal
patterns of DA release. Each dot represents a single DA release event, colored
depending on the subgroup (as in Fig. 2A). Each line shows one repetition of the
sequence during the recording; five examples of repetition are shown for each
pattern. (F–I) Frequency of the four temporal patterns during 8 d of recording.
Fig. 3. Spatial patterning of DA release events. (A) Representative double recording of DA secretion at distant sites in the ME (500 μm rostrocaudal), showing
desynchronization of release events at the minute timescale. (B) Distribution of
events from a double recording. (Top) “Rug plot” of DA release events, where
each vertical line represents one event detected by one of the two electrodes.
(Bottom) Density plot of the DA events, showing coincidence over a long timescale. (C) Cross-distribution of IEI between the two electrodes, showing reciprocal
delays during a ∼7-min time lag. (D) Autocorrelation of the signals on each of
the single electrodes shows only the expected peak at lag 0, suggesting that the
coordination is not dependent on pituitary feedback. (E and F) Distribution of
IEIs from the signals detected by the two electrodes during a period in which DA
release was only detected by one electrode (E) (light purple) or during a period
of coordination between both electrodes (F) (light purple and green; dark purple
shows overlap of IEIs between both electrodes).
Romanò et al. PNAS | February 28, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 9 | 2381
NEUROSCIENCE
high-frequency DA release events through direct stimulation of TIDA
neuron electrical activity, it cannot explain slower rhythms, including
those organized over a minutes range across the ME. This observation
raises the possibility that both intranetwork modes of information
transfer (14, 19) and neuronal inputs (13–16), which were recently
revealed in acute brain slice studies, may contribute to the coding of
DA release at the ME level. Nonetheless, the present study suggests
that the TIDA neuron network has the inherent capability to code DA
release over time periods consistent with the pacing of PRL secretion.
Finally, it has recently been shown that local somatodentritic DA
release from the TIDA population is able to influence close neuronal
neighbors within the arcuate nucleus (19). As D1 and D2 receptors
are expressed in the ME (20), DA release events at this location,
even those organized over slow rhythms, may also contribute to the
regulation of other neurohormones, such as those underlying circhoral
luteinizing- and growth-hormone pulses (20, 21).
The discovery of a multiple-timescale integration of DA delivery at the neurohemal space provides a hitherto unknown element concerning how the brain dialogues with peripheral organs
via a neuroendocrine connection. Such hierarchical organization
of rhythms has been observed in other brain regions where multiple oscillations co-occur, with the slower oscillation generally
driving local, faster oscillations (1). A similar multiple-timescale
neurohemal code may plausibly be shared by other assemblies of
hypothalamic parvocellular neurons. Notably, the ME is capable
of delivering hormone changes over a wide range of timescales,
from ultradian to seasonal (22, 23). This neurohemal structure
may thus provide a model system for investigating how parvocellular outputs are translated into slowly evolving endocrine outcomes such as reproduction, growth, metabolism, and stress.
Materials and Methods
Detailed methods are provided in SI Materials and Methods. All animal procedures
were approved by the local ethical committee under agreement CEEA-LR-12185
according to European Union Directive 2010/63/EU. Briefly, carbon fiber microelectrodes were fabricated using a single 30-μm thread of carbon fiber, coated in
Nafion and connected to a gold-plated pin. C57/BL6 female mice were stereotaxically implanted with carbon fiber microelectrodes at the level of the median
eminence [stereotaxic coordinates (relative to Bregma) −1.3 mm rostrocaudal,
0 mm mediolateral, and 6.1 mm ventral]. After recovery, mice were transferred to
recording cages, connected to an electrical swivel to allow for free movement, and
carbon fibers were held at 700 mV throughout the recording to detect secretion of
DA. Repeated tail blood microsampling was performed to measure blood PRL
levels, using a home-made ELISA. All statistical analysis was performed with
R software.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Evelyne Galibert for assistance with animal
breeding and maintenance. P.M. was supported by the Agence Nationale de la
Recherche (Grants ANR-06-BLAN-0322 and ANR 12 BSV1 0032), Fondation pour
la Recherche Médicale (Grant DEQ20150331732), France-Bioimaging (Grant
ANR-10-INBS-04-03), Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université de Montpellier, Biocampus-Montpellier, small animal imaging core facility (IPAM), Région Languedoc Roussillon, and the National Biophotonics and Imaging Platform (Ireland).
D.J.H. was supported by Diabetes UK R. D. Lawrence (12/0004431), European
Foundation for the Study of Diabetes/Novo Nordisk Rising Star and Birmingham Fellowships, a Wellcome Trust Institutional Support Award, a COMPARE
primer grant, a Medical Research Council Project Grant (MR/N00275X/1), and a
European Research Council Starting Grant (OptoBETA; 715884).
1. Buzsáki G, Logothetis N, Singer W (2013) Scaling brain size, keeping timing: Evolutionary
preservation of brain rhythms. Neuron 80(3):751–764.
2. Grattan DR (2015) 60 years of neuroendocrinology: The hypothalamo-prolactin axis.
J Endocrinol 226(2):T101–T122.
3. Herbison AE (2016) Control of puberty onset and fertility by gonadotropin-releasing
hormone neurons. Nat Rev Endocrinol 12(8):452–466.
4. Le Tissier P, et al. (December 9, 2016) An updated view of hypothalamic-vascular-pituitary
unit function and plasticity. Nat Rev Endocrinol, 10.1038/nrendo.2016.193.
5. Le Tissier PR, et al. (2012) Anterior pituitary cell networks. Front Neuroendocrinol
33(3):252–266.
6. Harris GW (1951) Neural control of the pituitary gland. II. The adenohypophysis, with
special reference to the secretion of A.C.T.H. BMJ 2(4732):627–634.
7. Ajika K, Hökfelt T (1973) Ultrastructural identification of catecholamine neurones in
the hypothalamic periventricular-arcuate nucleus-median eminence complex with
special reference to quantitative aspects. Brain Res 57(1):97–117.
8. Ibata Y, Watanabe K (1977) A morphological survey of the median eminence: Fluorescence histochemistry, electron microscopy and immunohistochemistry. Arch Histol
Jpn 40(Suppl):303–315.
9. Romanò N, et al. (2013) Plasticity of hypothalamic dopamine neurons during lactation
results in dissociation of electrical activity and release. J Neurosci 33(10):4424–4433.
10. Guillou A, et al. (2015) Assessment of lactotroph axis functionality in mice: Longitudinal
monitoring of PRL secretion by ultrasensitive-ELISA. Endocrinology 156(5):1924–1930.
11. Bernard V, Young J, Chanson P, Binart N (2015) New insights in prolactin: Pathological
implications. Nat Rev Endocrinol 11(5):265–275.
12. Goffin V, Touraine P (2015) The prolactin receptor as a therapeutic target in human
diseases: Browsing new potential indications. Expert Opin Ther Targets 19(9):1229–1244.
13. Briffaud V, Williams P, Courty J, Broberger C (2015) Excitation of tuberoinfundibular dopamine
neurons by oxytocin: Crosstalk in the control of lactation. J Neurosci 35(10):4229–4237.
14. Lyons DJ, Horjales-Araujo E, Broberger C (2010) Synchronized network oscillations in
rat tuberoinfundibular dopamine neurons: Switch to tonic discharge by thyrotropinreleasing hormone. Neuron 65(2):217–229.
15. Zhang X, van den Pol AN (2015) Dopamine/tyrosine hydroxylase neurons of the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus release GABA, communicate with dopaminergic and
other arcuate neurons, and respond to dynorphin, met-enkephalin, and oxytocin.
J Neurosci 35(45):14966–14982.
16. Lyons DJ, Ammari R, Hellysaz A, Broberger C (2016) Serotonin and antidepressant
SSRIs inhibit rat neuroendocrine dopamine neurons: Parallel actions in the lactotrophic axis. J Neurosci 36(28):7392–7406.
17. Lyons DJ, Hellysaz A, Broberger C (2012) Prolactin regulates tuberoinfundibular dopamine neuron discharge pattern: Novel feedback control mechanisms in the lactotrophic
axis. J Neurosci 32(23):8074–8083.
18. Constantin S, Iremonger KJ, Herbison AE (2013) In vivo recordings of GnRH neuron
firing reveal heterogeneity and dependence upon GABAA receptor signaling.
J Neurosci 33(22):9394–9401.
19. Stagkourakis S, Kim H, Lyons DJ, Broberger C (2016) Dopamine autoreceptor regulation of a hypothalamic dopaminergic network. Cell Reports 15:735–747.
20. Romero-Fernandez W, et al. (2014) Dopamine D1 and D2 receptor immunoreactivities
in the arcuate-median eminence complex and their link to the tubero-infundibular
dopamine neurons. Eur J Histochem 58(3):2400.
21. Fuxe K, et al. (1986) Medianosomes as integrative units in the external layer of the
median eminence. Studies on grf/catecholamine and somatostatin/catecholamine
interactions in the hypothalamus of the male rat. Neurochem Int 9(1):155–170.
22. Lincoln GA, Clarke IJ, Hut RA, Hazlerigg DG (2006) Characterizing a mammalian circannual pacemaker. Science 314(5807):1941–1944.
23. Walker JJ, et al. (2012) The origin of glucocorticoid hormone oscillations. PLoS Biol
10(6):e1001341.
24. Hulthe P, Hulthe B, Johannessen K, Engel J (1987) Decreased ascorbate sensitivity with
nafion-coated carbon fibre electrodes in combination with copper(II) ions for the electrochemical determination of electroactive substances in vivo. Anal Chim Acta 198:197–206.
25. Perkel DH, Gerstein GL, Moore GP (1967) Neuronal spike trains and stochastic point
processes. II. Simultaneous spike trains. Biophys J 7(4):419–440.
Fig. 4. Schematic of the brain–pituitary dialogue proposed to underlie hypothalamic dopaminergic control of pituitary prolactin secretion. Illustrated
are three subsets of hypothalamic TIDA neurons (colored in green, brown, and
magenta), which each locally release DA at the median eminence level (where
the first loop of portal capillaries reside). Local DA release events are organized
in the frequency domain (0.001 Hz–10 Hz) and recur as sequences. Local–global
integration across the median eminence coordinates high frequency DA release events within the minutes range. This allows the build-up of DA in the
portal blood required to efficiently inhibit pituitary prolactin secretion.
2382 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1616864114 Romanò et al.