Unexpected central role of the androgen receptor in
the spontaneous regeneration of myelin
Bartosz Bieleckia,b, Claudia Matternc
, Abdel M. Ghoumaria
, Sumaira Javaida,d, Kaja Smietankaa,b, Charly Abi Ghanema
,
Sakina Mhaouty-Kodjae
, M. Said Ghandourf,g, Etienne-Emile Baulieua,1, Robin J. M. Franklinh,i,
Michael Schumachera,1,2, and Elisabeth Traifforta,2
a
U1195 INSERM, University Paris-Sud, University Paris-Saclay, Kremlin-Bicêtre 94276, France; b
Department of Neurology and Stroke, Medical University of
Lodz, Lodz 90-549, Poland; c
Mattern Foundation, Vaduz 9490, Liechtenstein; d
Hussain Ebrahim Jamal Research Institute of Chemistry, International Center
for Chemical and Biological Sciences, University of Karachi, Karachi 75270, Pakistan; e
U1130 INSERM, UMR 8246 CNRS, University Pierre and Marie Curie,
Paris 75005, France; f
UMR 7357 CNRS, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg 67000, France; g
Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond 23284, VA; h
Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 0AH, United Kingdom; and i
Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0AH, United Kingdom
Contributed by Etienne-Emile Baulieu, September 9, 2016 (sent for review June 23, 2016; reviewed by Pamela E. Knapp and Bruce S. McEwen)
Lost myelin can be replaced after injury or during demyelinating
diseases in a regenerative process called remyelination. In the central
nervous system (CNS), the myelin sheaths, which protect axons and
allow the fast propagation of electrical impulses, are produced by
oligodendrocytes. The abundance and widespread distribution of
oligodendrocyte progenitors (OPs) within the adult CNS account for
this remarkable regenerative potential. Here, we report a key role for
the male gonad, testosterone, and androgen receptor (AR) in CNS
remyelination. After lysolecithin-induced demyelination of the male
mouse ventral spinal cord white matter, the recruitment of glial
fibrillary acidic protein-expressing astrocytes was compromised in the
absence of testes and testosterone signaling via AR. Concomitantly, the
differentiation of OPs into oligodendrocytes forming myelin basic
protein (MBP)+ and proteolipid protein-positive myelin was impaired.
Instead, in the absence of astrocytes, axons were remyelinated by protein zero (P0)+ and peripheral myelin protein 22-kDa (PMP22)+ myelin,
normally only produced by Schwann cells in the peripheral nervous
system. Thus, testosterone favors astrocyte recruitment and spontaneous oligodendrocyte-mediated remyelination. This finding may have
important implications for demyelinating diseases, psychiatric disorders, and cognitive aging. The testosterone dependency of CNS oligodendrocyte remyelination may have roots in the evolutionary history
of the AR, because the receptor has evolved from an ancestral 3-ketosteroid receptor through gene duplication at the time when myelin
appeared in jawed vertebrates.
myelin | oligodendrocytes | Schwann cells | testosterone |
androgen receptor
The remyelination of axons is a complex process, involving
interactions between different types of neural cells. It shows a
peculiarity that has been observed in both experimental models
and demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS) (1).
Although most of the remyelination is normally accomplished
by oligodendrocytes derived from oligodendrocyte progenitors
(OPs), a variable proportion of central nervous system (CNS) axons
can be remyelinated by cells with the immunophenotypic and ultrastructural characteristics of Schwann cells, the presence of which
is normally limited to the peripheral nervous system (PNS). These
cells indeed express protein zero (P0), a sensitive and specific
marker of Schwann cells (2). Moreover, analysis by electron microscopy demonstrated that they have the typical morphology of
myelinating Schwann cells (1–4). These ultrastructural findings indicate that the expression of P0 by part of the remyelinating cells is
not merely ectopic, but that these cells may correspond to authentic
Schwann cells. This observation was further supported by their
expression of Schwann cell-specific transcription factors (5).
Importantly, there is strong evidence that large numbers of the
Schwann cells present in demyelinating CNS lesions are derived
from OPs. The first evidence came from the transplantation of
purified OPs into demyelinating CNS lesions, in which endogenous
remyelination was prevented by X-irradiation (4, 6, 7). Unequivocal
confirmation that most Schwann cells contributing to CNS remyelination are indeed derived from OPs has been provided by genetic
fate-mapping in transgenic mice (5). This plasticity of OPs with a
neuroepithelial origin may come as a surprise, because Schwann cells
normally arise from the neural crest, and this problem still presents
a matter of controversy. However, under the influence of specific
morphogenetic factors, neuroepithelial cells can differentiate into
neural crest stem cells and give rise to neural cell types of both CNS
and PNS (4, 8).
Astrocytes play an important role in determining the balance between oligodendrocyte and Schwann cell remyelination in the CNS.
Thus, within a demyelinated lesion, oligodendrocyte remyelination
occurs in regions where astrocytes are present, whereas Schwann cell
remyelination preferentially occurs in the absence of astrocytes (7, 9,
10). Moreover, reducing astrocyte activation by a conditional genetic
deletion promoted Schwann cell remyelination (1).
Like other members of the steroid receptor family, the androgen receptor (AR) functions as a ligand-activated transcription
factor and also directly interacts with components of extranuclear
signaling pathways (11, 12). Here, by investigating the role of AR
signaling in the spontaneous regeneration of myelin within the
adult CNS, we show that the recruitment of glial fibrillary acidic
Significance
Myelin allows the rapid conduction of electrical signals and provides
axons with metabolic support. It appeared relatively late in evolution in hinge-jawed vertebrates and concomitantly with the emergence of the androgen receptor (AR), hinting at a specific role for
androgens in myelination. Here, we show that after demyelination
of the central nervous system (CNS), the male gonad, testosterone,
and AR favor astrocyte recruitment and myelin regeneration by
oligodendrocytes. In their absence, astrocytes remain sparse and
peripheral-type remyelination, classically associated with Schwann
cells, is predominantly detected. These findings reveal a novel
role of androgen signaling in CNS myelin formation and glial
cell communication, with possible implications for demyelinating,
psychiatric, and age-related disorders.
Author contributions: B.B., M.S., and E.T. designed research; B.B., A.M.G., S.J., K.S., and C.A.G.
performed research; B.B., C.M., S.M.-K., M.S.G., E.-E.B., and R.J.M.F. analyzed data; and B.B.,
E.-E.B., R.J.M.F., M.S., and E.T. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: P.E.K., Virginia Commonwealth University; and B.S.M., The Rockefeller
University.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
1
To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: etienne.baulieu@inserm.fr or
michael.schumacher@inserm.fr.
2
M.S. and E.T. contributed equally to this work.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1614826113/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1614826113 PNAS | December 20, 2016 | vol. 113 | no. 51 | 14829–14834
NEUROSCIENCE
protein (GFAP)+ astrocytes into a demyelinated area of the
ventral funiculus of male mice is compromised in the absence of
testes, testosterone, or AR. Consistent with a key role of astrocytes
in CNS remyelination, in their absence, the newly formed myelin
was P0+ and peripheral myelin protein 22-kDa (PMP22)+, most
likely reflecting Schwann cell remyelination.
Results
The Role of Testes and Testosterone in the Recruitment of Astrocytes
and Spontaneous Remyelination. We used an experimental model in
which acute demyelination is followed by spontaneous remyelination. Axons of the right ventrolateral white matter tract of the
adult male mouse spinal cord (ventral funiculus) were locally
demyelinated by stereotaxic microinjection of the demyelinating
toxin lysolecithin. Within 3 d, the injected area was depleted of
astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and myelin basic protein (MBP), a
major component and established marker of CNS myelin (13).
In gonadally intact males, the area of demyelination was rapidly
replenished by GFAP+ astrocytes (Fig. 1A, Left). Concomitantly,
axons were remyelinated by MBP+ CNS myelin (Fig. 1A, Right).
However, after surgical castration, the recruitment of astrocytes was
severely impaired (Fig. 1B, Left) and axons were preferentially
remyelinated by P0+ PNS-like myelin (Fig. 1B, Right). P0 immunostaining appeared sparse, consistent with previous results showing
that Schwann cell-remyelinated areas contain more demyelinated
axons than oligodendrocyte-remyelinated ones (1). Similar results
were obtained when tissue sections were analyzed with PMP22
antibody, another specific marker of peripheral myelin (14).
Immunostaining of MBP remained very sparse within the lesion and
perfectly matched immunostaining of proteolipid protein (PLP),
another major CNS myelin protein (Fig. S1). Despite the presence
of low levels of MBP isoforms in peripheral myelin (14), these
isoforms are likely not detected because the monoclonal anti-MBP
antibodies used in the present study only weakly stain PNS myelin.
We then showed that testosterone was the testicular factor necessary for the recruitment of astrocytes and the remyelination of
axons by oligodendrocytes. When castrated males received an s.c.
Silastic implant filled with testosterone for 4 wk, GFAP+ astrocytes
and MBP immunostaining were fully restored within the lesion area
(Fig. 1C), as in uncastrated males (Fig. 1A). The implant produced
physiological plasma and brain levels of testosterone (10–15 nM) as
determined by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (15).
The role of testosterone treatment in the concomitant replenishment of astrocytes and CNS remyelination is also illustrated in Fig. S2. Although axons were not counted, the staining
of large-caliber axons on the sagittal spinal cord sections with an
antibody against neurofilament 200 kDa revealed neither a
substantial loss of axons after lysolecithin-induced demyelination
nor a marked increase in axonal density by testosterone treatment (Fig. S3). These observations point to a crucial role of the
male gonads and testosterone in the recruitment of astrocytes
and in the balance between CNS- and PNS-like remyelination.
The AR Is Required for the Recruitment of Astrocytes and the
Spontaneous Regeneration of CNS Myelin. In the CNS, testosterone
exerts its effects either after binding to intracellular AR or via its
metabolites: estradiol, 3α-androstanediol, and 3β-androstanediol
(Fig. S4). Testosterone signaling via its conversion to estradiol may
correspond to a phylogenetically ancient mechanism, because the
ancestral intracellular steroid receptor was a receptor for estrogens (16). In addition, signaling of steroid metabolites via membrane proteins may have been an early evolutionary feature (17).
This possibility led us to investigate whether the testosteronedependent recruitment of astrocytes and spontaneous regeneration
of MBP+ myelin involved AR. We first used ARTfm mice, which
display a frameshift mutation in exon 1 of the AR gene, producing
a nonfunctional receptor (18). Despite testosterone supplementation
during 4 wk, the area of demyelination remained largely depleted of
astrocytes (Fig. 1D, Left) in ARTfm mice, and axons were mainly
remyelinated by P0+ (Fig. 1D, Right) and PMP22+ myelin.
We then tested whether AR expression within the CNS is
necessary for the stimulation of remyelination by testosterone.
Transgenic ARNesCre mice, displaying selective ablation of the AR
in neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes, but with microglial
cells being spared (19), were castrated and received a testosteronefilled s.c. Silastic implant during 4 wk following lysolecithin-induced
demyelination. As in ARTfm mice and in contrast to uncastrated
wild-type animals, testosterone therapy failed to restore astrocytes and MBP-immunoreactive myelin within the lesion. Instead,
PNS-type P0+ remyelination prevailed (Fig. 1E). Thus, testosterone
signaling via AR stimulates the recovery of astrocytes and shifts the
balance toward the regeneration of CNS myelin.
Testosterone Increased the Number of GFAP+ Astrocytes at the Border
of the Demyelinated Area and in Glial Cell Culture. In the vicinity of a
demyelinating lesion, new astrocytes are mainly generated from
preexisting ones expressing the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3
(5). Therefore, we investigated the effects of testosterone on the
Fig. 1. Testes, testosterone, and AR are required for the recruitment of astrocytes into a demyelinating lesion, thus determining the balance of central versus
peripheral types of remyelination. (A–E, Left) Visualization of astrocytes stained
with an antibody to GFAP (red). (A–E, Right) Immunohistochemical staining of
MBP+ CNS myelin (red) and P0+ PNS myelin (green) 4 wk after lysolecithininduced demyelination. Cell nuclei were blue-counterstained with DAPI. Dotted
lines delineate the boundary between the ventral white matter (VWM) and top
gray matter. (A) Recruitment of astrocytes and recovery of MBP+ CNS myelin in
the lesion area of gonadally intact males. Wt, wild type. (Scale bars: 100 μm.) (B)
After testes removal and treatment with an empty implant (+ V), astrocytes
remained sparse within the remyelinated area and remyelination was mediated
by Schwann cells (P0+ myelin). (C) Recruitment of GFAP+ astrocytes and regeneration of MBP+ myelin in castrated males treated with testosterone (+ T).
(D and E) Despite testosterone treatment, astrocytes were almost absent within
the remyelinated area in ARTfm or ARNesCre mice, and axons were remyelinated
by Schwann cells. The thin arrows show the areas depleted in GFAP+ labeling
and the thick arrows point out the areas displaying a limited expression of P0.
(F, Left) Mean area of GFAP immunolabeling (±SEM) (F5,28 = 5.67, P ≤ 0.001).
(F, Right) Mean area of P0 immunolabeling (±SEM) (F5,46 = 3.78, P ≤ 0.01). Letters
on top of columns indicate least significant differences (LSDs) [P ≤ 0.001 (Left),
P ≤ 0.01 (Right), post hoc LSD tests; n = 5–6].
14830 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1614826113 Bielecki et al.
rapid astrocytic response after lysolecithin administration. At the
top border of the lysolecithin-demyelinated area, the GFAPimmunoreactive surface was slightly increased in castrated males
as early as 4 d after lysolecithin injection. However, the extent of
GFAP labeling was markedly enhanced following testosterone treatment (Fig. 2 A and B). At 14 d after lysolecithin, the
demyelinated lesion was nearly entirely occupied by GFAP+ astrocytes, whereas the remyelination by oligodendrocytes was still
incomplete (1), indicating that astrocyte proliferation and recruitment precede the formation of new MBP+ myelin.
In mixed cultures of glial cells prepared from postnatal day 1–3
male mice, the number of reactive GFAP+ astrocytes was significantly increased 72 h after a 12-h exposure to lysolecithin. When
the culture medium was supplemented with testosterone (1 μM)
for 72 h after lysolecithin removal, a further increase in GFAP
immunostaining was observed (Fig. 2 C and D). Thus, testosterone
increased the astrocytic response both in vivo at the border of
the lesion and under in vitro conditions in mixed cultures of glial cells.
The Regeneration of MBP-Immunoreactive Myelin Is Accompanied by
the Recovery of Mature Oligodendrocytes. We confirmed that the
spontaneous regeneration of MBP-immunoreactive CNS myelin 4
wk after lysolecithin-induced demyelination was also dependent
on the presence of testes, testosterone, and the AR. Indeed, in
castrated males and in the absence of a functional AR (ARTfm and
ARNesCre mice), the recovery of MBP+ myelin was markedly impaired (Fig. 3). Importantly, the regeneration of MBP+ myelin was
always accompanied by full replenishment of the demyelinated
lesion by oligodendrocytes expressing carbonic anhydrase II (CA
II). In contrast, few CA II+ oligodendrocytes were observed after
castration or in the absence of AR (Fig. 3). Thus, testosteronedependent CNS remyelination goes together with the parallel
recruitment of both oligodendrocytes and astrocytes.
In the Presence of Astrocytes, Testosterone Increases the Proliferation
and Differentiation of OPs. Following oligodendrocyte loss, CNS
remyelination requires the recruitment of OPs and their differentiation into mature oligodendrocytes (20). To provide further
insight into the mechanisms by which testosterone promotes CNS
myelin regeneration in the presence of astrocytes, we first investigated its effect on neonatal OPs in mixed primary glial cell
cultures prepared from the brains of postnatal day 1–3 transgenic
male mice selectively expressing the enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP) in the oligodendrocyte lineage under the control
of the mouse Plp gene promoter (Plp-EGFP mice) (21). Confluent
cultures, composed of OPs and oligodendrocytes (green fluorescent) and astrocytes, were exposed for 12 h to lysolecithin damage
and were then treated with vehicle or testosterone. Three days
Fig. 2. Testosterone increases the reactivity and number of astrocytes in vivo
and in mixed cultures of glial cells. (A, Top) Immunohistochemical staining of
reactive GFAP+ astrocytes (green) and MBP+ myelin (red) in the ventrolateral
part of the unlesioned male mouse spinal cord [control (CTRL)]. Cell nuclei
were blue-counterstained with DAPI. (Scale bar: 50 μm.) (A, Middle and Bottom) GFAP+ astrocytes and MBP+ myelin at the top border of the demyelinated area (dotted line) in castrated male mice that received lysolecithin
injection and were treated for 4 d with an empty (+ V) or testosterone filled
(+ T) s.c. Silastic implant. (B) Mean area covered by GFAP+ astrocytes (±SEM)
(F2,21 = 14.19, P ≤ 0.001). Letters on top of columns indicate LSDs (P ≤ 0.05, post
hoc LSD tests; n = 5–6). (C, Top) Immunohistochemical staining of GFAP+ astrocytes (red) in CTRL mixed cultures of glial cells. (C, Middle) Exposing the cultures
for 12 h to lysolecithin and treating them for 3 d with vehicle (+ V) increased the
density of astrocytes (details are provided in legend of Fig. S5). (C, Bottom)
Further increase in the density of astrocytes was observed when cultures were
treated for 3 d with testosterone (+ T; 1 μM). (D) Mean area covered by GFAP+
astrocytes (±SEM) (F2,43 = 21.3, P < 0.001). Letters on top of columns indicate
LSDs [P ≤ 0.05 (Left), post hoc LSD tests; n = 3–4]. LPC, lysolecithin.
Fig. 3. Testes, testosterone, and AR are required for the spontaneous regeneration of CNS myelin by oligodendrocytes. (A–F, Left) MBP-immunoreactive
CNS myelin (green) in sagittal sections at 4 wk after lysolecithin microinjection
into the right ventrolateral white matter tract of the spinal cord. Cell nuclei were
counterstained with DAPI. (A–F, Right) Immunohistochemical staining of CA II+
oligodendrocytes (red). (A) Recovery of MBP and mature oligodendrocytes in
gonadally intact Wt mice. Dotted lines delineate the boundary between the
ventral white matter (VWM) and the top gray matter. (Scale bars: 100 μm.)
(B) Absence of recovery of MBP and oligodendrocytes after the removal of testes
and treatment with an empty s.c. implant (+ V). Castration was performed at the
age of 4–6 wk, 4 wk before lysolecithin-induced demyelination. (C) Regeneration
of MBP-immunoreactive myelin and replenishment of oligodendrocytes in castrated males treated with a testosterone-filled implant (+ T). In ARTfm mice with
a nonfunctional AR (D) or in ARNesCre mice with CNS-selective ablation of AR (E),
testosterone failed to stimulate CNS remyelination and the replenishment of
oligodendrocytes. (F, Left) Mean area devoid of MBP immunostaining (F5,30 =
44.8, P ≤ 0.001). Letters on top of columns indicate LSDs [P ≤ 0.01 (Left), P ≤ 0.05
(Right), post hoc LSD tests; n = 5–6]. (F, Right) Mean number of CA II+ oligodendrocytes (±SEM) within the area of demyelination (F5,34 = 9.2, P ≤ 0.001).
Bielecki et al. PNAS | December 20, 2016 | vol. 113 | no. 51 | 14831
NEUROSCIENCE
later, cells were fixed and immunostained with an antibody against
the chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan [neural/glial antigen 2 (NG2)],
a proven marker of OPs (Fig. S5 A–D).
The number of EGFP+ cells was reduced by half after exposure
to lysolecithin and remained low in the absence of testosterone.
Culture medium supplementation with testosterone (1 μM) significantly increased the number of both EGFP+ and NG2+ cells,
which exhibited a differentiated branched morphology (Fig. S5
A–D). Thus, adding testosterone to mixed glial cell cultures increases proliferation and differentiation of neonatal OPs.
Compared with their neonatal counterparts, adult OPs are more
quiescent and show other distinct features (22, 23). We thus also
examined the impact of testosterone on the oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor 2 (Olig2)-expressing cells in adult castrated
male mice. This transcription factor is confined to the CNS and is
critically involved in OP differentiation (24). Four weeks after injection of lysolecithin into the myelinated ventrolateral white
matter of the castrated male spinal cord, Olig2+ cells were significantly more abundant in males receiving a testosterone-filled Silastic implant compared with males receiving an empty implant
(Fig. S5E). Testosterone replacement indeed significantly increased
the number of Olig2+ cells, which even reached a higher density
compared with unlesioned control animals. Moreover, double
immunolabeling with proliferating cell nuclear antigen showed
that testosterone stimulated OP proliferation.
Discussion
Our data establish the importance of the male gonad, testosterone, and AR in the efficient recruitment of astrocytes into a
demyelinated lesion, with implications for the balance of oligodendrocyte versus peripheral-type remyelination. In gonadally
intact male mice or in castrated animals treated with testosterone, the area of lysolecithin-induced demyelination was replenished with astrocytes after 4 wk. Consequently, axons were
mainly remyelinated by oligodendrocytes. On the contrary, in the
absence of testosterone or a functional AR, astrocytes remained
sparse and P0+ myelin was preferentially detected within the lesion. This observation is consistent with previous studies showing
that Schwann cell remyelination occurs in areas of the CNS where
astrocytes are absent (9, 10).
Testosterone treatment has recently been shown to stimulate
the regeneration of myelin in a mouse model of severe chronic
demyelination, where no spontaneous remyelination was observed. Moreover, the strong remyelinating effect of testosterone
was AR-dependent (15). These findings already qualified the
brain AR as a promising drug target for remyelination therapy.
Nevertheless, it came as a surprise in the present study that
spontaneous remyelination by oligodendrocytes was markedly
inhibited in the absence of testes, testosterone, or AR.
Encoded by a single gene, AR only arose lately in jawed vertebrates, after the cyclostome-gnathosmome divergence (25, 26). This
occurrence has allowed androgens to acquire new signaling functions related to reproduction and sexual differentiation (27, 28). In
parallel, testosterone and its metabolite 5α-dihydrotestosterone,
both ligands of the AR, may also have acquired new functions in the
CNS, as suggested by the widespread distribution of AR within the
brain and spinal cord (29, 30).
Intriguingly, the evolutionary acquisition of AR was concomitant with the advent of the myelin sheath, constituting one of the
most recent structural innovations of the vertebrate nervous
system (Fig. 4). Like the AR, myelin first appeared in vertebrates
with a hinged jaw, most likely in placoderms, facilitating predatory and escape behaviors and improving information processing
by increasing the conduction speed of axons (31). Both myelin
and AR are present in extant cartilaginous fishes (sharks, rays),
but absent in jawless fishes (hagfishes and lampreys) (28, 32).
The parallel evolution of AR and myelin, together with the widespread distribution of AR in the CNS, suggests that androgen
signaling may have become involved in the regulation of myelin
formation and may play a role in the regenerative capacity of myelin,
which is preserved in the adult CNS.
The recruitment of astrocytes is likely to play a key role in the
remyelinating effect of testosterone because their presence was associated with oligodendrocyte remyelination, whereas P0+
/PMP22+
peripheral-type remyelination was observed in their absence. How
astrocytes participate in the remyelinating actions of testosterone
remains to be clarified. Unfortunately, the quality of presently available AR antibodies did not allow us to study the cellular distribution
of the receptor by dual labeling. In previous studies, AR immunoreactivity has been mainly localized to neurons and reactive microglia
and to subpopulations of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes (30, 33). In
our conditional ARNesCre mice, the AR was selectively inactivated in
neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes, whereas microglial cells
were spared (19). Thus, the effect of testosterone observed here does
not involve microglial AR. We used the Nestin-Cre mouse strain for
two major reasons. First, the high efficiency of the Cre-mediated
recombination, which is well characterized for this strain, results in
almost complete ablation of the floxed genes in neurons and
macroglial cells (15, 19, 34). Then, this choice allowed us to analyze
the role of testosterone without any preconceived idea about its
neural targets. Nevertheless, cell-specific conditional AR knockout
will be needed to identify the direct target cells of androgens. It is
conceivable that an androgen-dependent neuronal signal may
AR PR GR MR
Ancestral Estrogen receptor
(Anc ER)
Anc PR Anc CR Anc ER
Jawed vertebrates
(Gnathostomata)
Myelin
Jawless fishes
(Cyclostomata)
Anc SR Anc ER
Ancestral
Chordate
Genome duplication
Genome duplication
Bony fish
(Osteichthyes)
Land vertebrates
Lampreys
Hagfishes
Amphioxus
(Cephalocordata)
Tunicata
(Urochordata)
Cartilaginous fish
(Chondrichthyes)
Fig. 4. Coordinated acquisition of a hinged jaw and myelin, and parallel diversification of steroid receptors during vertebrate evolution. The surrounding of
axons with myelin was a prerequisite for the emergence of predation and escape
behavior in vertebrates. The evolutionary appearance of myelin indeed parallels
the acquisition of a hinged jaw (gnathostomata) (31). The oldest contemporary
vertebrates with myelin are cartilaginous fishes (rays and sharks), whereas myelin
is absent in jawless fishes (cyclostomata: hagfishes and lampreys) (32). Notably, at
the time when a hinged jaw and myelin appeared during vertebrate evolution,
the six nuclear steroid hormone receptors diverged from three ancestral receptors during a second round of whole-genome duplication, namely, the AR,
progesterone (PR), glucocorticosteroid (GR), mineralocorticosteroid (MR), and the
two estrogen (ER) receptors (25, 26). In extant cyclostomata, only ancestral
progesterone (Anc PR), corticoid (Anc CR), and estrogen (Anc ER) receptors are
present, themselves derived from two ancestral cephalochordata 3-ketosteroid
(AncSR) and estrogen (Anc ER) receptors (16). Cartilaginous fishes, the earliest
group of living jawed vertebrates with myelinated axons, contain the most ancient type of AR activated by testosterone (27).
14832 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1614826113 Bielecki et al.
attract astrocytes to the demyelinating lesion or, alternatively,
testosterone may directly act on astrocytes or oligodendrocytes.
Under the present experimental conditions, the magnitude of the
effects of castration, testosterone therapy, and AR inactivation on the
replenishment of astrocytes and on the balance of oligodendrocyteversus peripheral-type remyelination was noticeable. However, after a
demyelinating lesion induced by the injection of ethidium bromide
into the caudal cerebellar peduncle of male or female rats, remyelination by oligodendrocytes or Schwann cells was previously reported
not to be affected by gonadectomy (35). The use of different species
and different experimental conditions may explain this apparent
discrepancy. Alternatively, the effect of castration may also have been
masked by the local synthesis of androgens in the brain. Thus, an
exercise-dependent increase in androgen biosynthesis within the
hippocampus has been shown to stimulate neurogenesis (36). Other
“neurosteroids” synthesized within the CNS, such as progesterone,
may also positively influence the regeneration of CNS myelin (37,
38). However, in our system, the effect of AR signaling was very
robust and AR inactivation was not compensated for by other promyelinating signaling mechanisms.
The multipotency of OPs and their capacity to differentiate into
Schwann cells remain amazing (5). How the male gonad-dependent
recruitment of astrocytes and its influence on the balance of centralversus peripheral-type remyelination affect functional recovery after
a demyelinating event remains to be explored. Moreover, the
presence of testes has also been shown to influence the thickness of
the myelin sheaths, as well as the number and turnover of oligodendrocytes, which therefore differs between sexes (39).
Neuroprotective and immunosuppressive actions of testosterone
have previously been documented in experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis, a widely used animal model of MS (40). These
studies have provided the support for a small clinical pilot study,
suggesting that prolonged testosterone therapy of men with MS may
have neuroprotective and antiinflammatory effects and also improve cognitive performance (41). The present study may also gain
significance from clinical observations showing that (i) the incidence
of MS and the relapse rate throughout the disease are lower in men
(42); (ii) low testosterone levels are associated with an increased
risk of developing MS (43); (iii) levels of testosterone are decreased
in men with MS, and reduced levels of testosterone have been associated with disability (44, 45); and (iv) men reach disability
milestones more rapidly than women (46).
Testosterone levels progressively decrease with age, but the
hormonal decline occurs more rapidly in as many as 20% of
aging men (47). Whether age-dependent changes in testosterone
are a contributing factor to age-related white matter abnormalities (48) or the reduced regenerative capacity of myelin (49)
remains to be explored. Importantly, the influence of androgens
on the plasticity and regeneration of myelin may not only have
consequences for demyelinating diseases, because recent studies
have linked myelin abnormalities to a wide range of psychiatric
disorders and cognitive aging (50, 51).
Materials and Methods
Mice. Wild-type gonadally intact or castrated C57/Bl6 male mice were purchased at the age of 8–12 wk from Janvier Breeding Center. ARNesCre male
mice were obtained by crossing floxed AR mice (ARfl/Y) (52) with transgenic
mice expressing the Cre recombinase driven by the promoter and the CNSspecific enhancer of rat nestin (Nes), which is selectively active in neuronal
and glial precursor cells (34). Both strains were on a C57/BL6 background.
The ARNesCre mice have been extensively characterized (19) and were castrated at 2–3 mo of age under ketamine/xylazine anesthesia. ARTfm mice
were obtained from René Habert (French Atomic Energy Commission,
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France) (18). For in vitro experiments, Plp-EGFP mice
were obtained from Wendy Macklin (University of Colorado, Aurora, CO)
(21). All animals were housed in standard conditions: a 12-h light/dark
cycle with food and water ad libitum. All procedures were performed
according to the European Communities Council Directive (86/806/EEC)
for the care and use of laboratory animals and were approved by the
Regional Ethics Committee CEEA26, Ministère de l’Education Nationale,
de l’Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche. .
Surgical Procedures. Lysolecithin (Sigma–Aldrich) was microinjected into the
right ventral funiculus of the male mouse spinal cord under ketamine/xylazine
anesthesia. After shaving the skin at thoracic level T5, a midline incision was
made caudally to show thoracolumbar fascia and musculature. Two incisions
were performed on the fascia and external edges of dorsal muscles on both sides
of the vertebral column that allowed immobilization of the vertebral column on
the stereotaxic device (Kopf Instrument). The space between T12 and T13 was
identified and carefully dissected until the spinal cord was exposed. The central
vein was localized, and the dura mater was carefully pierced using a 32-gauge
dental needle. The injection was performed with a fine-tipped glass capillary,
elongated until reaching a diameter not exceeding 50 μm (Harvard Apparatus),
and mounted on a stereotaxic device after connection to a Hamilton syringe
with a plastic tube. By using an infusion pump, 1 μL of 1% lysolecithin solution
was unilaterally injected. After suturing the muscles, a Silastic tube, either empty
(control) or filled with testosterone (Fluka), was s.c. implanted.
Mixed Glial Cell Cultures. Male Plp-EGFP mouse pups were used between
postnatal days 0 and 3 (53). Briefly, immediately after decapitation, the brain
was dissected and placed into Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM)
supplemented with antibiotics. After the removal of meninges, the brain, including the hemispheres, cerebellum, and cerebral trunk, was placed in fresh
DMEM supplemented with antibiotics and 10% (vol/vol) FBS and then passed
through a sterile 100-μm nylon mesh. A total of 8 mL of cell suspension was
transferred to a poly-L-lysine–coated 100-mm Petri dish. The cells were allowed
to grow in DMEM supplemented with 10% (vol/vol) FBS and antibiotics at
37 °C in humidified 5% (vol/vol) CO2. The medium was changed after 4 d, and
twice a week later. Cells were used for experiments after 14 d in culture.
Before the experimental procedure, cells were transferred to a 24-well plate
containing sterilized and poly-L-lysine–coated glass coverslips.
In Vitro Induction of Oligodendrocyte Damage and Hormonal Treatment. Images
of the mixed glial cell cultures were taken under a fluorescent microscope
before any treatment and then daily to check viability and morphology of the
cells. Lysolecithin (0.1 mg/mL for 12 h) was used for inducing cell damage. After
lysolecithin removal, testosterone (1 μM) or vehicle alone (0.1% ethanol) was
added to the culture medium. Immunohistochemical analysis was carried out
after 4% (wt/vol) paraformaldehyde fixation of the cells for 10 min, PBS
washing, incubation for 1 h in 10% (vol/vol) normal goat serum (Vector), and
overnight incubation with the primary antibodies at 4 °C.
Histological procedures, antibodies used, image acquisition, and analysis
are specified in SI Materials and Methods.
Statistical Analysis. Statistical analyses were performed using Statistica 12
software (Statsoft, Inc.). All data were given as arithmetic means ± SEM. For
the in vivo experiments, each animal group comprised at least five mice. For
the in vitro experiments, the groups consisted of at least three wells (average values obtained from three fields of vision per well). Comparisons of
means were done by using one-way ANOVA, followed by a least significant
difference post hoc test.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Wendy B. Macklin (University of Colorado)
for sharing Plp-EGFP mice and René Habert for providing Tfm mice (University
Paris-Diderot and French Atomic Energy Commission). B.B. was successively
supported by the European Leukodystrophy Association (ELA) Foundation
(France) and by the Mattern Foundation. The fellowship of S.J. was funded
by the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan and the French Embassy in
Pakistan. This work was supported by grants from the ELA, French Multiple
Sclerosis Foundation (ARSEP), and UK Multiple Sclerosis Society.
1. Monteiro de Castro G, Deja NA, Ma D, Zhao C, Franklin RJ (2015) Astrocyte activation
via Stat3 signaling determines the balance of oligodendrocyte versus Schwann cell
remyelination. Am J Pathol 185(9):2431–2440.
2. Keirstead HS, et al. (1999) Polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule-positive CNS
precursors generate both oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells to remyelinate the CNS
after transplantation. J Neurosci 19(17):7529–7536.
3. Crang AJ, Gilson JM, Li WW, Blakemore WF (2004) The remyelinating potential and
in vitro differentiation of MOG-expressing oligodendrocyte precursors isolated from
the adult rat CNS. Eur J Neurosci 20(6):1445–1460.
4. Talbott JF, et al. (2006) Schwann cell-like differentiation by adult oligodendrocyte precursor cells following engraftment into the demyelinated spinal cord is BMP-dependent.
Glia 54(3):147–159.
Bielecki et al. PNAS | December 20, 2016 | vol. 113 | no. 51 | 14833
NEUROSCIENCE
5. Zawadzka M, et al. (2010) CNS-resident glial progenitor/stem cells produce Schwann
cells as well as oligodendrocytes during repair of CNS demyelination. Cell Stem Cell
6(6):578–590.
6. Keirstead HS, Morgan SV, Wilby MJ, Fawcett JW (1999) Enhanced axonal regeneration following combined demyelination plus schwann cell transplantation
therapy in the injured adult spinal cord. Exp Neurol 159(1):225–236.
7. Blakemore WF, Gilson JM, Crang AJ (2003) The presence of astrocytes in areas of
demyelination influences remyelination following transplantation of oligodendrocyte progenitors. Exp Neurol 184(2):955–963.
8. Mujtaba T, Mayer-Proschel M, Rao MS (1998) A common neural progenitor for the
CNS and PNS. Dev Biol 200(1):1–15.
9. Woodruff RH, Franklin RJ (1999) Demyelination and remyelination of the caudal
cerebellar peduncle of adult rats following stereotaxic injections of lysolecithin,
ethidium bromide, and complement/anti-galactocerebroside: A comparative study.
Glia 25(3):216–228.
10. Talbott JF, et al. (2005) Endogenous Nkx2.2+/Olig2+ oligodendrocyte precursor cells
fail to remyelinate the demyelinated adult rat spinal cord in the absence of astrocytes. Exp Neurol 192(1):11–24.
11. Matsumoto T, et al. (2013) The androgen receptor in health and disease. Annu Rev
Physiol 75:201–224.
12. Levin ER (2015) Extranuclear steroid receptors are essential for steroid hormone actions. Annu Rev Med 66:271–280.
13. Arnett HA, et al. (2004) bHLH transcription factor Olig1 is required to repair demyelinated lesions in the CNS. Science 306(5704):2111–2115.
14. Hagedorn L, Suter U, Sommer L (1999) P0 and PMP22 mark a multipotent neural crestderived cell type that displays community effects in response to TGF-beta family
factors. Development 126(17):3781–3794.
15. Hussain R, et al. (2013) The neural androgen receptor: A therapeutic target for myelin
repair in chronic demyelination. Brain 136(Pt 1):132–146.
16. Thornton JW (2001) Evolution of vertebrate steroid receptors from an ancestral estrogen receptor by ligand exploitation and serial genome expansions. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 98(10):5671–5676.
17. Pediaditakis I, et al. (2015) Dehydroepiandrosterone: An ancestral ligand of neurotrophin receptors. Endocrinology 156(1):16–23.
18. Merlet J, Racine C, Moreau E, Moreno SG, Habert R (2007) Male fetal germ cells are
targets for androgens that physiologically inhibit their proliferation. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 104(9):3615–3620.
19. Raskin K, et al. (2009) Conditional inactivation of androgen receptor gene in the
nervous system: Effects on male behavioral and neuroendocrine responses. J Neurosci
29(14):4461–4470.
20. Crawford AH, Stockley JH, Tripathi RB, Richardson WD, Franklin RJ (2014) Oligodendrocyte progenitors: Adult stem cells of the central nervous system? Exp Neurol
260:50–55.
21. Mallon BS, Shick HE, Kidd GJ, Macklin WB (2002) Proteolipid promoter activity distinguishes two populations of NG2-positive cells throughout neonatal cortical development. J Neurosci 22(3):876–885.
22. Shi J, Marinovich A, Barres BA (1998) Purification and characterization of adult oligodendrocyte precursor cells from the rat optic nerve. J Neurosci 18(12):4627–4636.
23. Psachoulia K, Jamen F, Young KM, Richardson WD (2009) Cell cycle dynamics of NG2
cells in the postnatal and ageing brain. Neuron Glia Biol 5(3-4):57–67.
24. Fancy SP, Chan JR, Baranzini SE, Franklin RJ, Rowitch DH (2011) Myelin regeneration:
A recapitulation of development? Annu Rev Neurosci 34:21–43.
25. Eick GN, Thornton JW (2011) Evolution of steroid receptors from an estrogen-sensitive ancestral receptor. Mol Cell Endocrinol 334(1-2):31–38.
26. Baker ME, Nelson DR, Studer RA (2015) Origin of the response to adrenal and sex
steroids: Roles of promiscuity and co-evolution of enzymes and steroid receptors.
J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 151:12–24.
27. Ogino Y, Katoh H, Kuraku S, Yamada G (2009) Evolutionary history and functional
characterization of androgen receptor genes in jawed vertebrates. Endocrinology
150(12):5415–5427.
28. Ogino Y, et al. (2016) Neofunctionalization of androgen receptor by gain-of-function
mutations in teleost fish lineage. Mol Biol Evol 33(1):228–244.
29. Simerly RB, Chang C, Muramatsu M, Swanson LW (1990) Distribution of androgen and
estrogen receptor mRNA-containing cells in the rat brain: An in situ hybridization
study. J Comp Neurol 294(1):76–95.
30. DonCarlos LL, et al. (2006) Novel cellular phenotypes and subcellular sites for androgen action in the forebrain. Neuroscience 138(3):801–807.
31. Zalc B, Goujet D, Colman D (2008) The origin of the myelination program in vertebrates. Curr Biol 18(12):R511–R512.
32. Bullock TH, Moore JK, Fields RD (1984) Evolution of myelin sheaths: Both lamprey and
hagfish lack myelin. Neurosci Lett 48(2):145–148.
33. Finley SK, Kritzer MF (1999) Immunoreactivity for intracellular androgen receptors in
identified subpopulations of neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes in primate
prefrontal cortex. J Neurobiol 40(4):446–457.
34. Tronche F, et al. (1999) Disruption of the glucocorticoid receptor gene in the nervous
system results in reduced anxiety. Nat Genet 23(1):99–103.
35. Li WW, Penderis J, Zhao C, Schumacher M, Franklin RJM (2006) Females remyelinate
more efficiently than males following demyelination in the aged but not young adult
CNS. Exp Neurol 202(1):250–254.
36. Okamoto M, et al. (2012) Mild exercise increases dihydrotestosterone in hippocampus
providing evidence for androgenic mediation of neurogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
109(32):13100–13105.
37. Hussain R, et al. (2011) Progesterone and Nestorone facilitate axon remyelination: A
role for progesterone receptors. Endocrinology 152(10):3820–3831.
38. El-Etr M, et al. (2015) Progesterone and nestorone promote myelin regeneration in
chronic demyelinating lesions of corpus callosum and cerebral cortex. Glia 63(1):
104–117.
39. Cerghet M, et al. (2006) Proliferation and death of oligodendrocytes and myelin
proteins are differentially regulated in male and female rodents. J Neurosci 26(5):
1439–1447.
40. Palaszynski KM, Loo KK, Ashouri JF, Liu HB, Voskuhl RR (2004) Androgens are protective in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis: Implications for multiple
sclerosis. J Neuroimmunol 146(1-2):144–152.
41. Sicotte NL, et al. (2007) Testosterone treatment in multiple sclerosis: A pilot study.
Arch Neurol 64(5):683–688.
42. Kalincik T, et al.; MSBase Study Group (2013) Sex as a determinant of relapse incidence and progressive course of multiple sclerosis. Brain 136(Pt 12):3609–3617.
43. Pakpoor J, Goldacre R, Schmierer K, Giovannoni G, Goldacre MJ (2014) Testicular
hypofunction and multiple sclerosis risk: A record-linkage study. Ann Neurol 76(4):
625–628.
44. Bove R, et al. (2014) Low testosterone is associated with disability in men with multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler 20(12):1584–1592.
45. Safarinejad MR (2008) Evaluation of endocrine profile, hypothalamic-pituitary-testis
axis and semen quality in multiple sclerosis. J Neuroendocrinol 20(12):1368–1375.
46. Confavreux C, Vukusic S (2006) Age at disability milestones in multiple sclerosis. Brain
129(Pt 3):595–605.
47. Harman SM, Metter EJ, Tobin JD, Pearson J, Blackman MR; Baltimore Longitudinal
Study of Aging (2001) Longitudinal effects of aging on serum total and free testosterone levels in healthy men. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 86(2):724–731.
48. Peters A, Sethares C (2002) Aging and the myelinated fibers in prefrontal cortex and
corpus callosum of the monkey. J Comp Neurol 442(3):277–291.
49. Ruckh JM, et al. (2012) Rejuvenation of regeneration in the aging central nervous
system. Cell Stem Cell 10(1):96–103.
50. Fields RD (2008) White matter in learning, cognition and psychiatric disorders. Trends
Neurosci 31(7):361–370.
51. Haroutunian V, et al. (2014) Myelination, oligodendrocytes, and serious mental illness. Glia 62(11):1856–1877.
52. De Gendt K, et al. (2004) A Sertoli cell-selective knockout of the androgen receptor
causes spermatogenic arrest in meiosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101(5):1327–1332.
53. Feutz AC, Pham-Dinh D, Allinquant B, Miehe M, Ghandour MS (2001) An immortalized jimpy oligodendrocyte cell line: Defects in cell cycle and cAMP pathway. Glia
34(4):241–252.
54. Arevalo MA, Azcoitia I, Garcia-Segura LM (2015) The neuroprotective actions of
oestradiol and oestrogen receptors. Nat Rev Neurosci 16(1):17–29.
55. Boon WC, Chow JD, Simpson ER (2010) The multiple roles of estrogens and the enzyme aromatase. Prog Brain Res 181:209–232.
56. van de Wijngaart DJ, Dubbink HJ, van Royen ME, Trapman J, Jenster G (2012) Androgen receptor coregulators: Recruitment via the coactivator binding groove. Mol
Cell Endocrinol 352(1-2):57–69.
57. Belelli D, Lambert JJ (2005) Neurosteroids: Endogenous regulators of the GABA(A)
receptor. Nat Rev Neurosci 6(7):565–575.
58. Reddy DS (2010) Neurosteroids: Endogenous role in the human brain and therapeutic
potentials. Prog Brain Res 186:113–137.
59. Lund TD, Hinds LR, Handa RJ (2006) The androgen 5alpha-dihydrotestosterone and its
metabolite 5alpha-androstan-3beta, 17beta-diol inhibit the hypothalamo-pituitaryadrenal response to stress by acting through estrogen receptor beta-expressing
neurons in the hypothalamus. J Neurosci 26(5):1448–1456.
14834 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1614826113 Bielecki et al.