Generalization of amygdala LTP and conditioned fear
in the absence of presynaptic inhibition
Hamdy Shaban1, Yann Humeau1,2, Cyril Herry1, Guillaume Cassasus1, Ryuichi Shigemoto3, Stephane Ciocchi1,
Samuel Barbieri4, Herman van der Putten5, Klemens Kaupmann5, Bernhard Bettler4 & Andreas Lu¨thi1
Pavlovian fear conditioning, a simple form of associative learning, is thought to involve the induction of associative, NMDA receptor–
dependent long-term potentiation (LTP) in the lateral amygdala. Using a combined genetic and electrophysiological approach, we
show here that lack of a specific GABAB receptor subtype, GABAB(1a,2), unmasks a nonassociative, NMDA receptor–independent form
of presynaptic LTP at cortico-amygdala afferents. Moreover, the level of presynaptic GABAB(1a,2) receptor activation, and hence the
balance between associative and nonassociative forms of LTP, can be dynamically modulated by local inhibitory activity. At the
behavioral level, genetic loss of GABAB(1a) results in a generalization of conditioned fear to nonconditioned stimuli. Our findings
indicate that presynaptic inhibition through GABAB(1a,2) receptors serves as an activity-dependent constraint on the induction of
homosynaptic plasticity, which may be important to prevent the generalization of conditioned fear.
Induction of NMDA receptor–dependent long-term potentiation
(LTP) in the lateral amygdala is thought to underlie the acquisition
of classical fear conditioning in rodents1–3. Projection neurons in the
lateral amygdala receive converging thalamic and cortical sensory
afferents that are simultaneously active during sensory experience1.
Whereas LTP at thalamic afferents is thought to be induced and
expressed postsynaptically3–6 (but see ref. 7), associative coactivation
of thalamic and cortical afferents induces presynaptic LTP at cortical
afferents involving the heterosynaptic activation of presynaptic NMDA
receptors8. Thus, by means of these receptors, cortical afferents are able
to detect and integrate the coincident activity of neighboring excitatory
inputs. Given that neuronal activity and plasticity in the lateral
amygdala is tightly constrained by local GABAergic inhibition5,9–11,
this raises the question of whether presynaptic integration is also
subject to inhibitory control.
Presynaptic GABAergic inhibition of excitatory synaptic transmission can be mediated by ionotropic GABAA (ref. 12) and metabotropic
GABAB receptors13. In the lateral amygdala, GABAA receptor–mediated
inhibition has a major role in postsynaptic integration5,9–11. Presynaptic LTP at cortical afferents, however, is insensitive to GABAA receptor–
mediated inhibition8, suggesting that presynaptic GABAA receptors do
not play a major role at cortico-amygdala afferents. Indeed, there is
accumulating evidence suggesting a role for GABAB receptors in
regulating amygdala-dependent fear and anxiety14. However, whereas
a role for GABAB receptors in presynaptic inhibition and integration at
glutamatergic synapses is well documented in many brain areas13,15–17
including the basolateral amygdala18,19, nothing is known about their
role in the lateral amygdala.
Functional GABAB receptors are generally thought to be heterodimers containing a GABAB(1) and a GABAB(2) subunit20. The
GABAB(1) subunit exists in two predominant differentially expressed
isoforms—GABAB(1a) and GABAB(1b). These differ by virtue of the fact
that the GABAB(1a) isoform contains two ‘sushi repeats’ in the N
terminal domain20. In the lateral amygdala, GABAB receptors are
expressed at moderate to high levels21,22 and can be activated by
afferent stimulation in vitro and in vivo9–11. These earlier studies
focused on somato-dendritic GABAB receptors that inhibit the postsynaptic neuron by activating inwardly rectifying Kir3-type K+ channels, which give rise to a slow inhibitory postsynaptic potential23.
Here we took a combined genetic and electrophysiological approach
to determine the role of presynaptic GABAB receptors during
the induction of presynaptic LTP in the lateral amygdala.
Moreover, we analyzed whether the observed effects on LTP in the
lateral amygdala are accompanied by behavioral alterations in Pavlovian fear conditioning.
RESULTS
GABAB blockade unmasks nonassociative homosynaptic LTP
Whole-cell current-clamp recordings from projection neurons showing
spike frequency adaptation upon depolarizing current injection were
obtained in the dorsal subdivision of the lateral amygdala4,5. Stimulation of afferent fibers from the internal capsule, containing thalamic
afferents4, and of those from the external capsule, containing cortical
afferents24 (Fig. 1a), elicited monosynaptic excitatory postsynaptic
potentials (EPSPs) of similar amplitudes and slopes. Simultaneous
stimulation of cortical and thalamic afferents with a single Poisson train
Received 17 April; accepted 6 June; published online 2 July 2006; doi:10.1038/nn1732
1Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland. 2Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unite´ Mixte de Recherche 7168,
F-67084 Strasbourg, France. 3Division of Cerebral Structure, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Myodaiji, Okazaki 444-8585, CREST, Japan Science and
Technology Corporation, Kawaguchi, Japan. 4Pharmazentrum, Department of Clinical-Biological Sciences, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland. 5Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Novartis Pharma AG, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland. Correspondence should be addressed to A.L. (andreas.luthi@fmi.ch).
1028 VOLUME 9 [ NUMBER 8 [ AUGUST 2006 NATURE NEUROSCIENCE
ARTICLES
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience