Voluntary action implies a subjective experience of the decision and
intention to act, as well as neural control of motor execution. For willed
action to be a functional behavior, the brain must have a mechanism for
matching the consequences of the motor act against the prior intention.
It is widely thought that the brain uses internal anticipatory models for
this purpose1,2, but it is still debated to what extent these models would
be available to awareness3. Estimating the time of a conscious intention
presumably requires access to an internal representation of the desired
movement. Internal motor representations—or internal models—
predict the future outcome of a given action4. Several studies suggest that
the parietal cortex is important in activating and maintaining such internal models5,6. For instance, when the parietal cortex is damaged, patients
lose the ability to predict through mental simulation the time necessary
to perform various hand movements5, indicating that this region is
involved in generating conscious motor images. According to some
reports1,2,7, another brain region, the cerebellum, is also involved in predicting the future state of a motor act. For example, when lifting an
object, subjects anticipate the increase in load force and accordingly
adapt their grip force to hold the object8. These fine motor adjustments
are clearly predictive and, as suggested by neuropsychological studies, are
severely disrupted by cerebellar lesions9. However, these processes may
not be available to conscious awareness. To investigate the role of the
cerebellum and the parietal cortex in the subjective experience of voluntary action, we examined overt reports on the awareness of the intention
to move in normal subjects and patients with focal brain lesions. We
found that cerebellar patients, similar to normal controls subjects, were
able to report when they first intended to move, whereas patients with
parietal damage could not. This result suggests that the parietal cortex is
involved in monitoring awareness of one’s own movements.
We recruited three groups of five subjects each: healthy volunteers,
patients with selective lesion in the parietal cortex, and patients with
selective lesion in the cerebellum. The experimental design was based
on that of Libet et al.10,11. Subjects were asked to perform a simple
voluntary movement, namely pushing a button with their index finger at a time of their own choosing, following a trial start cue. While
performing this simple task, subjects were instructed, in separate
blocks of trials, to focus their attention on either the actual onset of
their finger movement or their internal decision to execute it.
Judgments about the time of each event was accomplished in the following way: subjects looked at the single hand of a clock that started
to move at the beginning of each trial and stopped at a random time
following the button press (Fig. 1a). Subjects reported the position of
the clock’s hand either at the time they pushed the button (Mjudgment) or at the time they first became aware of their intention to
move (W-judgment). To make explicit to the subjects what they had
to focus on in the latter condition, the instruction was phrased as follows: “Note the position of the clock’s hand at the time when you felt
the urge to move but had not started moving yet.” Subjects were told
to feel free to execute the movement whenever they wanted, but not
before the clock’s hand had completed its first turn. During the experiment, onset of muscular activity was measured by electromyography (EMG) from flexor digitorum superficialis of the responding
hand. In all controls and in all patients, the electroencephalogram
(EEG) was also recorded on the scalp to measure readiness potential12
(RP) over motor areas (Fig. 1b). To assess each subject’s ability to correctly estimate time, we included one control condition (S-judgment)
in which subjects reported the location of the clock’s hand when a
beep was delivered by the computer.
1Institut des Sciences Cognitives CNRS, 67 Blv Pinel, 69675 Bron, France. 2Human Physiology Section, IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Via Ardeatina 354, 00179
Roma, Italy. 3Cerebrovascular Unit, Hopital Neurologique 59,bd Pinel 69394 Lyon, France.4Institute for Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London,
17 Queen Square, London, UK. Correspondence should be addressed to A.S. (sirigu@isc.cnrs.fr).
Published online 30 November 2003; doi:10.1038/nn1160
Altered awareness of voluntary action after damage to
the parietal cortex
Angela Sirigu1, Elena Daprati1,2, Sophie Ciancia1, Pascal Giraux1, Norbert Nighoghossian3, Andres Posada1 &
Patrick Haggard4
A central question in the study of human behavior is the origin of willed action. EEG recordings of surface brain activity from
human subjects performing a self-initiated movement show that the subjective experience of wanting to move follows, rather
than precedes, the ‘readiness potential’—an electrophysiological mark of motor preparation. This raises the issue of how
conscious experience of willed action is generated. Here we show that patients with parietal lesions can report when they
started moving, but not when they first became aware of their intention to move. This stands in contrast with the performance
of cerebellar patients who behaved as normal subjects. We thus propose that when a movement is planned, activity in the
parietal cortex, as part of a cortico-cortical sensorimotor processing loop, generates a predictive internal model of the
upcoming movement. This model might form the neural correlate of motor awareness.
ARTICLES
8 0 VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 1 | JANUARY 2004 NATURE NEUROSCIENCE
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
RESULTS
Behavioral data
Normal subjects were accurate when estimating movement onset (Mjudgment): they judged the time of movement execution to be almost
at the exact time as when they actually pressed the button (estimated
– real time difference, 19.8 ± 39.0 ms; Fig. 2). In agreement with previous reports10,11, subjects estimated the time they first intended to
move (W-judgment) in advance of the actual movement onset (mean
difference, –239.2 ± 92.9 ms). Cerebellar patients showed a similar
behavior: M-judgments coincided with movement onset (mean difference, 10.9 ± 68.1 ms) and W-judgments largely anticipated onset of
button press (mean difference, –314.1 ± 193.2 ms). Patients with parietal lesions also made accurate M-judgments
(mean difference, –16.4 ± 94.5 ms), but in
striking contrast with both normal subjects
and cerebellar patients, they reported to have
first intended to move at a time very close to
that of movement onset (mean difference,
–55.0 ± 132.6 ms). An ANOVA run on differences between estimated
and actual button press revealed a significant main effect of judgment
type (F1,12 = 47.925, P < 0.00001) and, more interestingly, a significant interaction between group and judgment type (F2,12 = 8.343,
P < 0.005). Thus, whereas the three subject groups performed similarly on M-judgments, the W-judgments of parietal patients were significantly later than those of control subjects and cerebellar patients
(P < 0.004 and P < 0.001, respectively, post hoc comparison). No difference was found between the latter two groups. A separate ANOVA
compared the three groups on the control task (S-judgment). Results
showed a similar pattern across subjects, in agreement with previous
studies13: estimated time preceded beep occurrence in all subjects
(control, mean difference, –85.8 ± 31.0 ms; cerebellar, –38.6 ±
46.6 ms; parietal, –60.2 ± 15.9). Indeed, no significant differences
emerged across groups, confirming the selectivity of the impairment
of parietal patients for the W-judgment.
Electrophysiological data
EEG patterns differed according to group. As previously shown10–12,
self-initiated movements are characterized by a progressive, negative rise
in the potential recorded on the motor areas of the hemisphere contralateral to the responding hand, beginning about 1.5 s before the
motor response. Here, detection of the initial rise in this potential varied
between subjects and judgment conditions, but it was present in both
control subjects and cerebellar patients, and for both M- and
W-judgments. In controls, RP onset was detected prior to button press
(897.0 ± 517.8 ms, mean ± standard deviation, s.d.) when estimating
movement time and at –1331.0 ± 514.3 ms when estimating intention to
move (Fig. 3a). A similar pattern was found in four cerebellar patients
(one patient’s recording was discarded because of artifacts), where RP
onset was recorded in advance of movement onset in the hemisphere
contralateral to the responding hand in both conditions (M-judgment:
ARTICLES
NATURE NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 1 | JANUARY 2004 8 1
Figure 2 Behavioral data. Results for Wjudgments (upper bars) and M-judgments (lower
bars) in control subjects (white), cerebellar
(gray) and parietal (black) patients. Dashed lines
indicate standard deviation. Each bar represents
the difference (in ms) between subjective report
and exact time of button press. Additional data
on subject response distribution across
conditions can be found in Supplementary
Figure 3 online.
Figure 1 Task procedure and EEG recording sites. (a) Time course of the
task. At time 0 the clock appears and the hand begins to rotate at a rate of
2,560 ms per complete revolution. Subjects were asked to push the
button with their index finger at a time of their own choosing and then to
report the position of the clock’s hand when they executed the movement
(M–judgment) or when they first made their internal decision to move
(W–judgment, ‘wanting to move’). (b) EEG electrode distribution on the
scalp. Vertex electrode (Cz) served as reference23. For analysis, signals
from Fc5, C3, Cp3, C5 and Cp5 electrodes over the left hemisphere
(according to the 10-20 system) and Fc6, C4, Cp4, C6, Cp6 over the right
hemisphere were averaged.
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
–974.0 ± 411.9 ms, W-judgment: –1214.0 ±
398.1 ms; Fig. 3b). In the parietal patients, a
different pattern was found: when W-judgments were required, RP in the motor areas of
the hemisphere contralateral to the moving
hand was poorly detectable. An EEG negativity
with a low amplitude was found prior to button press in the case of M-judgments (Mjudgment: –1551.3 ± 515.3 ms; Fig. 3c). A
potential concern regarding the absence of a
RP during W-judgment in parietal patients
may be a poor EEG signal quality due to individual differences, noise, and so on. We can
rule out this possibility by inspecting other
components of the electrophysiological signal.
First, movement-related EEG responses were
present in these patients in the M-judgement
condition. Comparison of amplitudes of EEG
activity at the time of finger press across
groups (Kruskall-Wallis test) did not show any
statistical differences (P = 0.118, n.s.), although
amplitude of maximal negativity was reduced
in both patients’ group compared to controls
(median value: cerebellar patients –1.4; parietal patients –1.6; controls –3.1). Second, signal-related activity in response to the control stimulus (beep) showed
comparable stimulus-related potentials (namely P100, N200 and P300)
in parietal patients and normal controls (Supplementary Fig. 1 online).
DISCUSSION
The results of the present experiment are highly suggestive of the different contributions of parietal cortex and the cerebellum to the production and maintenance of internal models of willed actions. By
asking subjects to report the moment when they first felt the urge to
move, we forced them to directly access an early stage of motor preparation, namely to access an internal model of the desired movement.
As postulated above, we expected that damage to the cerebellum
and/or to the parietal cortex would impair this judgment. Our results
show that cerebellar patients have normal awareness of both intention and action, suggesting that this structure is not involved in this
aspect of motor awareness. We can speculate that, although the cerebellum is involved in the predictive control of action4,7 its predictions
may not reach awareness14. On the other hand, our results show that
parietal patients have lost the ability to correctly estimate the instant
in time when their intention to move was defined. This deficit does
not result from a nonspecific impairment in making correct temporal
estimations, as shown by the fact that the patients’ ability to estimate
movement time was unimpaired, as was the temporal detection of the
onset of a sound used in the control task (see Methods). Might the
delayed judgement in the W-condition result from sensory impairment of the contralesional hand? Because of this impairment, could
these patients have relied more on vision of their hand moving rather
than on an internal estimate? This interpretation seems unlikely.
Subjects were forced to watch the clock rather than their hand during
each trial. In addition, only one subject (P4) presented a mild sensory
ARTICLES
8 2 VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 1 | JANUARY 2004 NATURE NEUROSCIENCE
Figure 3 Samples of EEG recording. Readiness
potential recorded from (a) two control subjects
(right-hand movements, left-hemisphere
recording), (b) a left cerebellar patient (C1, lefthand movements, right-hemisphere recording)
and a right cerebellar patient (C3, right-hand
movements, left-hemisphere recording) and (c) a
left parietal patient (P5, right-hand movements,
left- hemisphere recording) and a right parietal
patient (P3, left-hand movements, righthemisphere recording). Dotted blue traces
indicate M-judgment trials, red lines indicate Wjudgment trials. RP data for all parietal patients
can be found in Supplementary Figure 4 online.
Interestingly, in normal subjects and in three
cerebellar patients, RP onset in the W-condition
appeared earlier than it did in the M-condition. It
is well known that RPs are modulated by motor
preparation and expectancy24. Asking subjects to
focus attention on their decision to move probably
involved more cognitive effort and deliberate
action, thus producing the increase in RP.
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
impairment for the contralesional hand, whereas the others performed normally on clinical sensory testing.
We can speculate that lesions of the parietal cortex affected either
the neural processes involved in generating motor mental representations of a voluntary action or those involved in gaining subjective
access to them. These hypotheses are consistent with the view that the
parietal cortex contains an internal model used for conscious monitoring of voluntary actions5,6.
Although our EEG data should be taken cautiously because of
the small sample studied and to limitations intrinsic to the technique, a further suggestion could be drawn from the present study.
The reduced RP observed in parietal patients is in line with their
behavioral responses. It could reflect a more general deficit in EEG
motor responses, but an alternative possibility is that the reduced
RP in parietal patients may be a consequence of an impaired feedback loop with the frontal motor areas for elaborating and developing plans for voluntary action15. Interestingly, the apparent absence
of volition and longer-range planning that follows extensive frontal
damage suggests that prefrontal areas may be involved in generating prior intention16,17. Given that the parietal patients otherwise
had no difficulty in initiating willed actions, our results imply that
one of the parietal lobe’s principal functions might be to self-monitor motor intentions, rather than being directly involved in forming intentions. This would be consistent with the idea that this
brain region is necessary for anticipatory control of action6.
Whereas the frontal cortex may thus participate in the formation of
intentions, the parietal cortex might be responsible for constructing the way we experience them as linked to our actions. Further
studies should directly address this hypothesis.
In all parietal patients examined, cortical damage overlapped in the
inferior parietal lobule, more precisely in the angular gyrus
(Brodmann area 39; Fig. 4). Lesions of the inferior left or the right
parietal lobule produce severe and selective impairments in motor
imagery5. When the lesions are located in the left parietal areas, a gesture disorder known as apraxia is observed. Apraxic patients are usually aware that their gestural production is inadequate, but they lack
insight about what exactly they are doing wrong18. When placed in a
ambiguous situation requiring discrimination of their own movements from that performed simultaneously by another agent, parietal
patients often attribute to themselves the movement made by the
other agent19. Finally, when a lesion of the right inferior parietal lobule occurs, patients are frequently unaware of and even deny coexisting motor disturbance20. Common to all of these impairments is a
failure of introspection specific to the domain of action, consistent
with our hypothesis that the parietal lobe plays a critical role in the
conscious monitoring of motor intentions.
We suggest that the brain may contain several internal models used
for predictive control of voluntary action. An implicit module in the
cerebellum would provide fast processing for execution of actions and
predicting their sensory consequences7,21. A second system, in the
parietal cortex, would monitor intentions and motor plans at a higher
level, detecting when actions match their desired goals. These
processes typically involve conscious experience.
METHODS
Subjects. Participants were: (i) five healthy volunteers (S; all women; mean age
54.2 years, range 41–66; mean educational level 15.2 years, range 12–20)
(ii) five cerebellar patients (C; three women, two men; mean age 46.0, range
24–55; mean educational level 11.6, range 5–19; mean time since lesion
11.6 months, range 7–24) (iii) five patients with selective lesion in the parietal
cortex (P; all men; mean age 50.2, range 36–64; mean educational level 12.2,
range 8–17; mean time since lesion 47.4 months, range 5–134). All patients
were in the chronic phase. All participants were strongly right-handed according to the Edinburgh Inventory22, except patients C4 and P4 (ambidextrous).
Patients signed an informed consent to participate in the study.
Patient details. Within the cerebellar group, three patients suffered lesion to
the left cerebellar hemisphere (C1, C4, C5) and two to the right (C2, C3).
Except for one case (C2) in which the lesion was secondary to tumor removal,
the lesion was due to either spontaneous hematoma (C1, C3) or stroke (C4,
C5). Lesions of parietal patients followed stroke and involved selectively the
right (P1, P2, P3) or the left parietal cortex (P4, P5). In all parietal patients, the
lesion involved the angular gyrus (BA 39); in patient P4, this region alone was
affected. In patients P1, P2 and P3, it extended into the supramarginal gyrus
(BA 40) and in P5 into the middle temporal cortex. Lesions were reconstructed
using patients’ MRI (1.5-T clinical whole-body scanner, Siemens) and projected into Bancaud and Talairach MRI template (Fig. 4).
For each patient, elementary sensorimotor functions, gestural, visuospatial
and perceptual abilities were evaluated (Supplementary Table 1 online). A
general neuropsychological screening assessed non-verbal intellectual abilities, memory functions, language comprehension and naming. No severe cognitive impairments, language deficits or visuospatial deficits were found. All
patients could make voluntary hand actions with normal muscular force. Two
cerebellar patients (C1, C4) showed mild optic ataxia for the ipsilesional hand.
Two parietal subjects (P1, P4) showed apraxia. P1 presented mild sensory disturbance for the contralesional hand.
Procedure. Subjects sat in front of a computer (40 cm from screen), their hand
on a button box. A clock (diameter 2.2 cm; marked in steps of 5 units from 0 to
60 like a traditional clock) appeared in the center of the screen (Fig. 1a). At the
beginning of each trial, the clock’s hand started to move clockwise from a random location and completed a full sweep in 2,560 ms. Subjects were asked to
push the button with their index finger at a time of their own choosing: they
were told to feel free to execute the movement whenever they wanted, but not
before the clock’s hand had completed its first full sweep. In one block of trials,
subjects were instructed to attend to the actual onset of their finger movement
and report the location of the clock’s hand when they executed the movement
ARTICLES
NATURE NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 1 | JANUARY 2004 8 3
Figure 4 Lesioned cortical region (blue area) common to all five parietal
patients. The ischemic lesions involved mainly the angular gyrus
(Brodmann area 39) of the parietal cortex. Top, transverse slices. From left
to right, Talairach coordinates (z-plane) of each slice: +17, +23, +28.
Bottom, lateral view.
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
ARTICLES
8 4 VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 1 | JANUARY 2004 NATURE NEUROSCIENCE
(M-judgment). In a separate block of trials, they were required to report the
location of the clock’s hand when they first made their internal decision to
move (W-judgment, for ‘wanting to move’). The clock’s hand stopped its rotation at a random interval (400–800 ms) after the button press. Control subjects executed the button presses with their right index finger, cerebellar
patients used the index finger of their ipsilesional hand, and parietal patients
used the index finger of their contralesional hand. To assess each subject’s ability to correctly estimate time, we used a control condition (S-judgment) in
which the subject reported the location of the clock’s hand when a beep was
delivered by the computer. For M-, W- and S-judgment, two blocks of 40 trials
were run. Order of block presentation was balanced.
Behavioral data recording and analysis. For each trial, the time the button
press actually occurred was subtracted from the time that subjects reported
that they executed (M-judgment) or first intended to execute the movement
(W-judgment). For the control task (S-judgment), the time when the sound
actually occurred (as recorded by the computer) was subtracted from the time
at which subjects reported hearing the sound. A negative value indicates that
subject’s estimate preceded the real event; a positive value indicates that it followed the real event.
EEG recordings. We recorded on the scalp with a 64-channels net (Fig. 1b;
Geodesic System, EGI) equipped with carbon-silver electrodes (sampling frequency 500 Hz). Signals were amplified, filtered (high pass 0.01, low-pass
200 Hz), collected into movements-locked epochs ranging from 2,000 ms
before button press (–2,000) to 500 ms afterwards (+500), and then they were
averaged. The first 200 ms of each epoch were used for baseline correction.
Eye-movement artifacts were automatically filtered before averaging. EEG
data analysis was performed separately for each subject.
Electrophysiological data analysis. Onset of the readiness potential (RP) was
analyzed by two electrophysiologists who were naive with regard to the purpose
of the experiment and the identity of the subjects (for details on computation of
RP onset, see Supplementary Fig. 2 online). Onset of muscular activity was collected by electromyography (EMG) from flexor digitorum superficialis of the
responding hand (sampling frequency 1,000 Hz). EMG signals were amplified
and filtered (low-pass filter 50 Hz). The first burst of muscular activity preceding
a button press was considered as muscular onset. On average, this measure preceded a button press by 40.6 ms (± 12.0 ms, s.d.) in controls and by 43.8 ± 19.8 ms
and 60.08 ± 19.4 ms in cerebellar and parietal patients, respectively.
Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Neuroscience website.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank J.R. Duhamel for helpful discussion on a first draft,
L. Granjon and B. Messaoudi for assistance during EEG and EMG recording, and
A. Cheylus and M. Thevenet for help analyzing EEG data and doing lesion
reconstruction. This research was supported by Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS).
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.
Received 22 July; accepted 11 November 2003
Published online at http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience/
1. Kawato, M. Internal models for motor control and trajectory planning. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol. 9, 718–727 (1999).
2. Wolpert, D.M., Ghahramani, Z. & Jordan, M.I. An internal model for sensorimotor
integration. Science 269, 1880–1882 (1995).
3. Blakemore, S.J., Wolpert, D.M. & Frith, C.D. Abnormalities in the awareness of
action. Trends Cogn. Sci. 6, 237–242 (2002).
4. Wolpert, D.M. & Ghahramani, Z. Computational principles of movement neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 1212–1217 (2000).
5. Sirigu, A. et al. The mental representation of hand movements after parietal cortex
damage. Science 273, 1564–1568 (1996).
6. Desmurget, M. & Grafton, S. Forward modeling allows feedback control for fast
reaching movements. Trends Cogn. Sci. 4, 423 (2000).
7. Blakemore, S.J., Frith, C.D. & Wolpert, D.M. The cerebellum is involved in predicting the sensory consequences of action. Neuroreport 12, 1879–1884
(2001).
8. Flanagan, J.R. & Wing, A.M. The role of internal models in motion planning and
control: evidence from grip force adjustments during movements of hand-held
loads. J. Neurosci. 17, 1519–1528 (1997).
9. Babin-Rattè, S., Sirigu, A., Gilles, M. & Wing, A. Impaired anticipatory finger gripforce adjustments in a case of cerebellar degeneration. Exp. Brain Res. 128,
81–85 (1999).
10. Libet, B., Gleason, C. A., Wright, E. W. & Pearl, D. K. Time of conscious intention
to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity (readiness potential). The unconscious initiation of a freely voluntary act. Brain 106, 623–642 (1983).
11. Libet, B. Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of conscious will in voluntary action. Behav. Brain Sci. 8, 529–566 (1985).
12. Kornhuber, H.H. & Deecke, L. Hirnpotentialänderungen bei Willkürbewegungen
und passiven Bewegungen des Menschen: Bereitschaftspotential und reafferente
Potentiale. Pflügers Arch. ges. Physiol. 284, 1–17 (1965).
13. Haggard, P., Clark, S. & Kalogeras, J. Voluntary action and conscious awareness.
Nat. Neurosci. 5, 382–385 (2002).
14. Blakemore, S.J. & Sirigu, A. Action prediction in the cerebellum and in the parietal lobe. Exp. Brain Res. (in press).
15. Leiguarda, R.C. & Marsden, C.D. Limb apraxias: higher-order disorders of sensorimotor integration. Brain 123, 860–879 (2000).
16. Shallice, T. & Burgess, P. Deficits in strategy application following frontal lobe
damage in man. Brain 114, 727–741 (1991).
17. Frith, C.D., Blakemore, S.J. & Wolpert, D.M. Abnormalities in the awareness and
control of action. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 29, 1771–1788
(2000).
18. Buxbaum. L.J., Sirigu, A., Schwartz, M.F. & Klatzky, R. Cognitive representations
of hand posture in ideomotor apraxia. Neuropsychologia 41, 1091–1113
(2003).
19. Sirigu, A., Daprati, E., Pradat-Diehl, P., Franck, N. & Jeannerod, M. Perception
of self-generated movement following left parietal lesion. Brain 122,
1867–1874 (1999).
20. Weinstein, E.A. & Kahn, R. Denial of Illness: Symbolic and Physiological Aspects
(Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, Massachusetts, 1955).
21. Wolpert, D.M., Ghahramani, Z. & Flanagan, J.R. Perspectives and problems in
motor learning. Trends Cogn. Sci. 1, 487–494 (2001).
22. Oldfield, R.C. The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia 9, 97–113 (1971).
23. Bertrand, O., Perrin, F. & Pernier, J. A theoretical justification of the average reference in topographic evoked potential studies. Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 62, 462–464 (1985).
24. McCallum, W.C. Potentials related to expectancy, preparation and motor activity.
in Human Event-Related Potentials (ed., Picton, T.W.) 427–534 (Elsevier,
Amsterdam, 1988).
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience