282 nature neuroscience • volume 6 no 3 • march 2003
articles
Elimination and strengthening of excitatory synaptic connections by spontaneous or experience-evoked neuronal
activity are critical steps in the developmental organization
and fine-tuning of neuronal circuits1–7. However, direct evidence for the involvement of synapse elimination/strengthening in the formation of organized inhibitory circuits has
remained largely elusive. Most cellular mechanisms and models thought to mediate synaptic plasticity and reorganization
depend on the depolarizing and spike-eliciting effects of excitatory synapses, effects that generally are not associated with
inhibitory synapses.
Compared with the clear organization that is present in
topographically organized excitatory pathways, the detailed
anatomical organization of most inhibitory circuits is obscure.
In most brain areas, inhibition is generated by local inhibitory
networks, which are composed of anatomically and functionally distinct local interneurons. This organization represents a
major obstacle for specific experimental manipulations and the
developmental analysis of inhibitory circuits. Thus, despite
accumulating evidence for plasticity and developmental changes
in global levels of inhibition8–10 and its further influence on
excitatory plasticity11–13, interpretation of these changes at the
level of specific inhibitory connections has been difficult.
To date, perhaps the best evidence in support of spatial finetuning of inhibitory networks comes from studies of the developing auditory system14–16. In mammals, evidence from two
sound localization circuits has demonstrated the presence of
specific reorganization of inhibitory connectivity. In the medial superior olive of gerbils, anatomical analysis shows an
activity-dependent cellular redistribution of glycinergic synapses, a process that is thought to be important for processing
Elimination and strengthening of
glycinergic/GABAergic connections
during tonotopic map formation
Gunsoo Kim and Karl Kandler
Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 3500 Terrace Street, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA
Correspondence should be addressed to K.K. (kkarl@pitt.edu)
Published online 10 February 2003; doi:10.1038/nn1015
Synapse elimination and strengthening are central mechanisms for the developmental organization of
excitatory neuronal networks. Little is known, however, about whether these processes are also
involved in establishing precise inhibitory circuits. We examined the development of functional
connectivity before hearing onset in rats in the tonotopically organized, glycinergic pathway from the
medial nucleus of the trapezoid body (MNTB) to the lateral superior olive (LSO), which is part of the
mammalian sound localization system. We found that LSO neurons became functionally disconnected
from ~75% of their initial inputs, resulting in a two-fold sharpening of functional topography. This was
accompanied by a 12-fold increase in the synaptic conductance generated by maintained individual
inputs. Functional elimination of MNTB–LSO synapses was restricted to the period when these
glycinergic/GABAergic synapses are excitatory. These results provide new insights into the mechanisms
by which precisely organized inhibitory circuits are established during development.
interaural time differences in this species15. In the lateral superior olive (LSO), pruning of immature glycinergic/GABAergic
axon terminals and refinement of LSO dendrites support the
hypothesis that elimination of inhibitory synapses sharpens
inhibitory connectivity17,18. It remains unclear, however,
whether and to what degree these anatomical changes reflect
the reorganization of an operative inhibitory network rather
than the structural elimination of exuberant (and perhaps nonfunctional) immature synaptic contacts or axonal processes.
Here we investigated the emergence of a precisely organized
inhibitory circuit by analyzing functional connectivity and
synaptic properties of MNTB–LSO connections in developing
rats before hearing onset. Neurons in the MNTB are glycinergic in adult animals and glycinergic/GABAergic during development16,19 and give rise to a purely inhibitory and precisely
tonotopically organized pathway to the LSO18,20 (Fig. 1a). The
MNTB–LSO pathway carries auditory information from the
contralateral cochlea. The frequency-specific alignment of this
inhibitory pathway with excitatory inputs from the ipsilateral
cochlea provides the neuronal basis for encoding the interaural intensity differences used for sound localization21. Our
results indicate that the establishment of the functional topography of the MNTB–LSO pathway is accomplished by extensive, but specific, elimination of functional glycinergic/
GABAergic synapses and by an increase in the synaptic conductance elicited by maintained connections. Notably, functional elimination of MNTB–LSO connections takes place
while these connections are excitatory, lending support to the
hypothesis that the transient excitatory action of immature
inhibitory synapses is an important mechanism for organizing the development of inhibitory circuits.
© 2003 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience