ARTICLES
Although axonal regeneration is extremely limited in the mammalian
adult central nervous system (CNS), partial lesions of the spinal cord
can be followed by spontaneous, and often substantial, functional
improvements1–4. The mechanisms underlying this recovery are not
fully understood, but include recuperation from the spinal shock5,6,
remyelination1,7 and axonal sprouting. The occurrence of spontaneous sprouting of axons has been shown after spinal cord lesion for a
number of axonal tract systems, including the corticospinal tract
(CST)8–12. To mediate functional recovery, the sprouting requirements of transected descending supraspinal tract systems like the CST
are two fold. First, transected CST fibers must contact spared
intraspinal neuronal tracts that bridge the lesion. Second, these
intraspinal neurons must form synaptic contacts on the original target cells of the transected CST. This type of reorganization has long
been suggested13, but has never been conclusively shown. In the present study, we show that, after midthoracic dorsal hemisection, the
hindlimb CST collaterals sprout into the cervical gray matter where
they contact descending propriospinal neurons (PSNs). The spinal
cord holds two populations of PSNs—‘long’ and ‘short’—that have
different abilities to reconnect the transected CST to the lumbar cord.
The long PSNs are involved in coupling forelimb and hindlimb activity (e.g., during walking)14,15. They originate in the cervical enlargement (C3–C5), travel in the ventral and lateral funiculi16 and
terminate in the ventral horn of the lumbosacral enlargement17,18.
They are therefore spared by mid-thoracic dorsal hemisection and
bridge spinal levels above and below the lesion. In contrast, short
PSNs connect the upper (C3–C4) and lower (C6–Th1) cervical cord
and are involved in visually guided target reaching with the forelimbs19,20. Although they are not affected by mid-thoracic dorsal
hemisection, they do not provide an axonal pathway beyond the
lesion. Here we show that initially axonal sprouts contacted short and
long PSNs equally, but sprouts that contacted long PSNs were maintained, whereas sprouts onto short PSNs were progressively lost. In
parallel, long PSNs increased their terminal arborization onto lumbar
motor neurons. Trans-synaptic labeling showed that at least a part of
these contacts were in fact true synapses, thereby creating a new
intraspinal circuit. In our re-lesion experiments, the CST of rats
whose functional recovery was substantial after mid-thoracic dorsal
hemisection was specifically transected at the level of the medulla
oblongata. The result was that both cortical stimulation–induced
hindlimb movements and CST-specific behavioral responses were
abolished. Parallel to the intraspinal remodeling, we observed a
rearrangement of the cortical hindlimb motor map.
This indicates that axonal sprouting is part of a general rewiring of
cortical, supra- and intraspinal connections that, at least in part,
explains functional recovery after spinal cord injury and likely constitutes a crucial element of rehabilitation in humans.
RESULTS
Lesioned hindlimb CST axons sprout and contact long PSNs
In normal adult rats, axons arising from the hindlimb motor cortex21
send only very few collaterals into the gray matter of the cervical
1Department of Neuromorphology, Brain Research Institute, University of Zürich and Department of Biology, ETH Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zürich,
Switzerland. 2Present address: Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid, Box 8108, St. Louis,
Missouri 68110, USA. 3Department of Neurophysiology, Brain Research Institute, University of Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland. 4Institute of Molecular and Cellular Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institute, Federal Research Center for Virus Diseases of Animals, D-17498 Insel Riems, Germany.
Correspondence should be addressed to F.M.B. (florence@pcg.wustl.edu).
Published online 15 February 2004; doi:10.1038/nn1195
The injured spinal cord spontaneously forms a new
intraspinal circuit in adult rats
Florence M Bareyre1,2, Martin Kerschensteiner1,2, Olivier Raineteau3, Thomas C Mettenleiter4, Oliver Weinmann1
& Martin E Schwab1
In contrast to peripheral nerves, central axons do not regenerate. Partial injuries to the spinal cord, however, are followed by
functional recovery. We investigated the anatomical basis of this recovery and found that after incomplete spinal cord injury
in rats, transected hindlimb corticospinal tract (CST) axons sprouted into the cervical gray matter to contact short and long
propriospinal neurons (PSNs). Over 12 weeks, contacts with long PSNs that bridged the lesion were maintained, whereas
contacts with short PSNs that did not bridge the lesion were lost. In turn, long PSNs arborize on lumbar motor neurons, creating
a new intraspinal circuit relaying cortical input to its original spinal targets. We confirmed the functionality of this circuit by
electrophysiological and behavioral testing before and after CST re-lesion. Retrograde transynaptic tracing confirmed its integrity,
and revealed changes of cortical representation. Hence, after incomplete spinal cord injury, spontaneous extensive remodeling
occurs, based on axonal sprout formation and removal. Such remodeling may be crucial for rehabilitation in humans.
NATURE NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 3 | MARCH 2004 269
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience