Exploration of joint redundancy but not task space
variability facilitates supervised motor learning
Puneet Singha
, Sumitash Janab
, Ashitava Ghosalc,1, and Aditya Murthyb,1
aCentre for Biosystems Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India; bCentre for Neuroscience, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560012, India; and cDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India
Edited by Michael E. Goldberg, Columbia University College of Physicians, New York, NY, and approved October 27, 2016 (received for review August
15, 2016)
The number of joints and muscles in a human arm is more than
what is required for reaching to a desired point in 3D space.
Although previous studies have emphasized how such redundancy and the associated flexibility may play an important role
in path planning, control of noise, and optimization of motion,
whether and how redundancy might promote motor learning
has not been investigated. In this work, we quantify redundancy
space and investigate its significance and effect on motor learning. We propose that a larger redundancy space leads to faster
learning across subjects. We observed this pattern in subjects
learning novel kinematics (visuomotor adaptation) and dynamics (force-field adaptation). Interestingly, we also observed differences in the redundancy space between the dominant hand and
nondominant hand that explained differences in the learning of
dynamics. Taken together, these results provide support for the
hypothesis that redundancy aids in motor learning and that the
redundant component of motor variability is not noise.
supervised learning | minimum-intervention principle | reaching |
motor noise | motor control
R
edundancy is a ubiquitous property that renders biological
systems robust to disruptions. Goal-directed movements also
display redundancy because a given movement, such as touching one’s nose, can be made in many different ways with different combinations of joint angles. Although redundancy generates flexibility, it also poses a fundamental problem for the
motor system because a large component of motor variability is
attributed to muscle noise (1). Thus, if muscles operated independently, the total noise (reflected in the trajectory) would be
a summation of the noise due to the component parts. However, if the covariation of muscles or joints occurs such that the
effect of individual muscle or joint variability is mitigated, it is
possible to maintain acceptable levels of variability while maintaining a reasonable degree of redundancy that allows flexibility in behavior. Consistent with this view, it has been observed
in a wide range of tasks (2–7) that variability is not eliminated
but optimized (8–11) to accumulate in a task-relevant dimensions using a minimum-intervention principle (12). Such variability, that is a consequence of redundancy, can be quantified as an
uncontrolled manifold (13–15) in which task-independent variability is constrained to a redundant subspace (or “uncontrolled
manifold”).
Although minimizing variability is expected to improve taskrelated performance, recent evidence suggests that motor
variability paradoxically helps in motor learning (16–20). Such
findings are supported by ideas in reinforcement learning (21,
22), which suggest that baseline variability increases exploration, which in turn facilitates learning. Interestingly, motor
variability has also been shown to help learning during supervised error-based learning tasks (16), suggesting a more general role of variability in motor learning. In this study, we tested
whether variability arising from joint redundancy plays a role in
supervised motor learning.
Results
We used two experimental setups shown in Fig. S1A. The subject
moves the end-effector of a robot manipulator or hand from an
initial point to a task-space target point. As shown in Fig. 1, the
experiment had three phases—a preadaptation baseline period,
followed by a phase with either one of two kinds of perturbations:
a visuomotor (kinematic perturbation) or an applied viscous
curl force (dynamic perturbation) and finally a postadaptation
phase when the perturbation was removed. We simultaneously
measured the end point and joint angles while subjects reached
to the target during the baseline period as shown in Fig. S1B.
The map between the joint angles and the end point (x , y) point
is many-to-one, i.e., there is redundancy. The joint variability in
the baseline period was quantified into two components—the
joint variability due to the redundancy termed as the null-space
variability that did not affect end point and the joint variability that caused changes in end point termed as task-space
variability (Fig. S1C). In this work, we studied the effect of
these two types of variability on the learning of kinematic and
dynamic perturbations. We have studied learning in (i) simple visuomotor adaptations (two directions), (ii) generalized
visuomotor adaptation (eight directions), and (iii) generalized
force-field adaptation when subjects used their dominant and
nondominant hand.
Redundancy in Kinematic Learning. We trained 40 subjects to learn
point-to-point reaching movements using their dominant hand,
along two directions, in a visuomotor perturbation that was set
using Eq. 1. In this experiment, the cursor was rotated by −45◦
from the hand trajectory (Fig. S2A). The trajectory of the hand
Significance
Theories of reinforcement learning claim that motor variability helps in motor learning and are supported by recent experimental work. In contrast, theories of motor control propose
that variability is noise that needs to be suppressed. We
attempt to reconcile these apparent contradictory positions.
Using the formulation of the unconstrained manifold hypothesis, we show that motor variability has two components—a
part arising out of the redundancy that does not affect taskspace and another component related to task-space variability. We show that the motor variability component resulting
from the redundancy determines both dynamic and kinematic
learning ability across subjects without affecting task-space
variability.
Author contributions: P.S., S.J., A.G., and A.M. designed research; P.S. and S.J. performed
research; P.S., A.G., and A.M. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; P.S. analyzed data;
and P.S., A.G., and A.M. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1
To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: asitava@mecheng.iisc.ernet.in or
aditya@cns.iisc.ernet.in.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1613383113/-/DCSupplemental.
14414–14419 | PNAS | December 13, 2016 | vol. 113 | no. 50 www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613383113
NEUROSCIENCE
Target
Hand Aimed
Target
Hand Aimed
Force
Hand
Aimed
Target
Preadaptation Force-field adap. Postadaptation
Target
Hand Aimed
Target
Hand
Aimed
Target
Hand
Aimed
Preadaptation Visuomotor adap. Postadaptation
Cursor Cursor Cursor
Fig. 1. Experiment setup and design. Experiments were divided into
preadaptation (baseline), adaptation, and postadaptation (washout)
epochs. Subjects adapted to a visuomotor perturbation (Top) or a force-field
perturbation (Bottom) in separate experiments.
for a typical subject in the preadaptation (baseline) (Fig. S2B),
visuomotor adaptation (Fig. S2C), and postadaptation epochs
(Fig. S2D) are shown. Overall, the pattern of trajectories are consistent with previous work showing that whereas typical movements follow a nearly straight trajectory in the baseline condition, they show strong curved trajectories in the presence of
a visuomotor perturbation. The curved trajectories gradually
become straighter with practice over the course of about 60 trials
(Fig. 2A). In addition, as a consequence of motor learning, subjects showed a washout effect (postadaptation) where errors in
trajectory invert direction when the learned visuomotor perturbation is turned off.
To quantify the error, we used the error at peak velocity along
the trajectory. The reduction in peak velocity error (Eq. 9) was
used as a metric to quantify the learning rate for each subject.
To test whether the learning rate of a subject could be predicted
on the basis of motor redundancy exhibited during the preadaptation (baseline period), we computed N(J) (Eq. 8), the chosen
measure of variability due to redundancy space called null-space
variability. We divided the population into two groups based
on their learning rate (above-mean and below-mean learning
group), as quantified by the fitted exponential β value (Fig. 2B).
In support of the hypothesis, the null-space variability was significantly different between the two learning groups (Fig. 2C).
Interestingly, we also found a strong positive correlation between
baseline null-space variability and learning rate in the visuomotor adaptation task (Fig. 2D; r = 0.55,P = 0.0002). However, we
found no correlation between baseline task-space variability and
learning rate (r = 0.13,P = 0.43).
Redundancy in Generalized Kinematic Learning. To test whether
redundancy could aid in learning a generalized task, we next
examined 10 subjects while they learned point-to-point reaching movements with the visuomotor perturbation (Eq. 1) along
eight directions, where in each case, the cursor was rotated by 45◦
from the hand trajectory (Fig. S2E). The trajectory of the hand
for a typical subject in the preadaptation (baseline) (Fig. S2F),
visuomotor adaptation (Fig. S2G), and postadaptation epochs
(Fig. S2H) are shown. Each individual subject’s learning curve
is shown in Fig. S3, and a representative subject is shown in
Fig. 3A. The average behavior pooled across 10 subjects showed
a similar learning pattern (Fig. 3B; goodness of fit, r
2 = 0.90).
Again, the learning rate in the visuomotor perturbation and the
null-space and task-space variability in the preadaptation baseline period was computed. A significant correlation between the
null-space variability with learning rate was observed (Fig. 3C;
r = 0.71,P = 0.021). Interestingly, we found no correlation of
the baseline task-space variability with the learning rate (Fig. 3D;
r = 0.42,P = 0.22).
Redundancy and Dynamic Learning. To test whether redundancy
could aid in learning in other types of perturbation, we trained
10 subjects to learn point-to-point reaching movements using
their dominant hand, along 8 directions, in a force-field that was
set using the force-field perturbation defined by Eq. 2. In this
experiment, the perturbation was proportional to the velocity
of the hand but perpendicular to the hand movement direction
(Fig. S2I). The trajectory of the hand for a typical subject in the
preadaptation (baseline) (Fig. S2J), force-field adaptation (Fig.
S2K), and postadaptation epochs (Fig. S2L) are shown. Similar
to the visuomotor perturbation, and consistent with literature,
typical hand movements follow a nearly straight trajectory in the
baseline condition, and they show strong curved trajectories in
the presence of a viscous curl force-field. The curved trajectories gradually become straighter with practice over the course
of about 200 trials (Fig. 4A). In addition, as a consequence of
motor learning, subjects showed a washout effect, where errors
in trajectory inverted in direction when the learned force-field
was turned off in the postadaptation period. This washout error
converged to baseline levels within approximately 100 trials. The
average behavior pooled across the 10 subjects showed a similar learning pattern (Fig. 4B; goodness of fit, r
2 = 0.93). The
A
C D
B
Fig. 2. Joint redundancy predicts learning rate in a visuomotor adaptation
task. (A) Error at peak velocity in preadaptation, visuomotor adaptation,
and postadaptation for a representative subject showing the progression
of adaptation. Errors in each of the two directions are color-coded. Fitted exponential (black line) significantly accounts for most of the progression of errors across trials during adaptation. (B) Three-trial running
mean ± SEM across subjects (shading is SEM). Fitted exponential curves
across subjects significantly account for most of the progression of errors
during adaptation (red indicates above-mean learning group; blue indicates
below-mean learning group). (C) Comparison of baseline null-space variability with learning rate between the above-mean learning group (red)
and below-mean learning group (blue) reveal corresponding differences
in null-space variability between groups. (D) Subject-by-subject comparison
(n = 40) of baseline null-space variability with learning rate shows a significant positive relationship. Two subjects whose learning rates were negative
have been clamped to 0. Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences
(
∗
P < 0.05,
∗∗P < 0.005,
∗∗∗P < 0.0005).
Singh et al. PNAS | December 13, 2016 | vol. 113 | no. 50 | 14415
A
C
B
D
Fig. 3. Joint redundancy predicts the learning rate in a generalized visuomotor adaptation task. (A) Error at peak velocity in preadaptation, adaptation, and postadaptation showing the progression of adaptation for a subject. Errors in each of the eight directions are color-coded. (B) Eight-trial
running mean ± SEM across subjects (shading is SEM). Fitted exponential
curves across subjects significantly account for most of the progression of
errors in the adaptation. (C) The comparison of baseline null-space variability at peak velocity with learning rate shows a significant positive relationship between joint redundancy and motor learning. (D) The comparison of
baseline task-space variability at peak velocity with learning rate shows no
significant relationship between variability and motor learning.
learning curves of each individual subject with the dominant and
nondominant hand are shown in Figs. S4 and S5, respectively.
As before, the reduction in error at peak velocity (Eq. 9) was
used as a metric to quantify the learning rate for each subject.
In the force-field adaptation period, the mean learning rate was
0.006 ± 0.002 for the dominant hand and 0.004 ± 0.001 for the
nondominant hand. To test whether the learning rate of a subject under a viscous perturbing force could be predicted on the
basis of motor redundancy exhibited during the preadaptation
(baseline period), we again computed null-space variability as in
Eq. 8. We found a strong positive correlation between baseline
null-space variability and learning rate in the force-field [Fig. 4C;
r = 0.69,P = 0.027 (dominant hand), r = 0.60,P = 0.067 (nondominant hand)]. Consistent with that observed for the kinematic perturbation task, we found poor correlation between the
learning rate and task-space variability in the baseline period
[Fig. 4D; r = 0.22,P = 0.53 (dominant hand), r = 0.13,P = 0.72
(nondominant hand)].
Redundancy and Dominant and Nondominant Hand Learning. Differences between the learning of the dominant and nondominant arm across subjects is consistent with previous work (23)
and was used as an additional approach to test the relation
between null-space variability and motor learning. To test this
notion, we compared the learning rate and null-space variability between the dominant and nondominant hand in 10 subjects. We observed that the mean learning rate for the nondominant hand (mean, 0.004 ± 0.001) was significantly less than the
mean learning rate for the dominant hand (mean, 0.006±0.002)
(Fig. 5A; P = 0.008, t(8) = 3.54). Interestingly, null-space variability was also lesser in the nondominant hand (mean, 0.054 ±
0.036) compared with the dominant hand (mean, 0.12 ± 0.066)
(Fig. 5B; P = 0.035, t(8) = 2.54). We observed no difference in
the mean task-space variability between the dominant and nondominant hand, suggesting that task-space variability did not
influence learning rate. Furthermore, we observed a strong correlation (Fig. 5D; r = 0.84,P = 0.002) between the difference in
the learning rate and the difference in the null-space variability of the dominant and nondominant hand, suggesting that the
difference in the null-space variability could partly explain the
difference in learning rate. We also observed an outlier subject whose learning rate was higher in the nondominant hand
compared with the dominant hand (marked as a dotted line in
Fig. 5 A–C and marked in blue in Fig. 5D). Nevertheless, even
for this subject, the null-space variability was greater in the nondominant hand compared with the dominant hand, in support of
our hypothesis. Taken together, these findings indicate that the
difference in learning rate between the dominant and nondominant hand may be a consequence of the greater redundancy in
the dominant hand.
Discussion
In contrast to previous work that has studied joint redundancy
and learning in isolation, this study tested the relation between
these two variables under the assumption that the extra degrees
of freedom conferred by the arm is used by the motor system
to facilitate learning. We have shown that task-space variability
in the baseline period while reaching a target in task-space has
low correlation with learning during perturbations, whereas the
variability in the null-space, resulting from redundancy, aids in
learning. We interpret these results as indicating that exploration
of redundancy aids in motor learning when a visuomotor perturbation or a force-field perturbation is present.
Joint Redundancy. The uncontrolled manifold hypothesis (UCM),
that has its origin in the initial observations by Bernstein (24, 25)
C
A B
D
Fig. 4. Joint redundancy predicts rate of learning in a force-field adaptation task. (A) Error at peak velocity in preadaptation, adaptation, and
postadaptation showing the progression of adaptation for a subject.
(B) Eight-trial running mean ± SEM across subjects (shading is SEM). Fitted exponential curves across subjects significantly account for most of the
progression of errors in the adaptation (red indicates dominant hand, blue
indicates nondominant hand. (C) Comparison of baseline null-space variability at peak velocity with learning rate shows a relationship. (D) Comparison of baseline task-space variability at peak velocity with learning rate
shows no significant relationship between task-space variability and motor
learning.
14416 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613383113 Singh et al.
NEUROSCIENCE
A B
C D
Fig. 5. Learning differences between the dominant hand and nondominant hand. (A) Learning differences in the dominant hand (red) and nondominant hand (blue) (n = 10) reveal faster learning in the dominant hand.
(B) Baseline null-space variability in the dominant and nondominant hand
reveals differences in null-space variability between hands. (C) However,
baseline task-space variability in the dominant hand and nondominant hand
reveals no differences in task-space variability between hands. (D) Correlation between the difference in null-space variability with the difference in
learning rate between the dominant hand and nondominant hand shows
a significant positive relationship. The outlier subject data are shown as a
dotted line (A–C) and as a green dot (D).
is the dominant framework to understand and quantify joint
redundancy (13–15). Such redundancy is now established as a
ubiquitous feature of behavior observed across a variety of tasks
(2–7). In the current study we followed the UCM framework
to quantify joint redundancy. However, unlike previous work,
we also quantified redundancy in individual subjects in addition
to measuring the group response and observed large variability,
suggesting that redundancy might be an idiosyncratic feature that
is unique to each subject and/or session. In addition, unlike past
work where redundancy was quantified at the maximum peak
velocity or at the target location, we restricted our computation
to the former in case of all perturbations. This choice was made
because task-space variability is known to be highest at the peak
velocity of the trajectory and smallest at the end point (target),
particularly when the targets are small. Thus, quantifying redundancy at peak velocity is better suited to reveal the full scale of
variability across subjects, which may be essential to understand
its bearing on motor learning.
Previous work has suggested that the degree of redundancy
can be task specific and can be optimized such that the motor
system obeys the principle of minimum intervention in which
the brain only controls task relevant variability but does not
control task irrelevant or null-space variability. Although we
did not explicitly study the control of null-space variability, we
did observe interesting task specific differences indicating that
null-space variability or task irrelevant variability also may be
actively controlled and is not merely an epiphenomena of having more degrees of freedom than required for the task. For
example, in our pool of subjects we observed that null-space
variability was on average greater in the dynamics condition
(mean, 0.11±0.069) than that in the kinematic condition (mean,
0.04 ± 0.020) even in the preadaptation period when the reaching task was identical. This difference in null-space variability
is likely to be task-specific, the basis of which remains to be
elucidated.
Inline with earlier work (23) that showed differences between
the dominant and nondominant hand during force-field perturbation but not during visuomotor (kinematics) perturbation, we
tested null-space variability in the dominant versus nondominant
hand in the dynamic perturbation task. It is particularly interesting to note that despite similar force application and task-space
variability (Fig. 5C), the null-space variability was greater in the
dominant hand, and further, differences within subjects correlate
with corresponding differences in the learning rates (Fig. 5D).
The larger null-space variability seen in the dominant hand may
thus provide a natural explanation of why learning might be more
potent in the dominant hand and reinforces the belief that nullspace variability not only reflects the biomechanical characteristics of the arm but may reflect active control.
Dynamic and Kinematic Learning. To study motor learning, we followed previous work that has tested the ability of subjects to
implicitly adapt their motor behavior in the presence of dynamic
and kinematic perturbations (26–29). In our learning paradigm,
subjects learned the perturbations while making movements in
two directions (Fig. 2) and also in all eight directions (Fig. 3),
picked at random. Hence, unlike some learning paradigms that
emphasize specific learning in one direction, our learning is
expected to generalize across directions. Thus, we used a single
exponential fit pooled across all directions to study the average
rate of learning as a single variable even though our data suggest the presence of fast and slow learning phase that has been
reported in the literature (30). In the future, we hope to study
direction-specific motor learning to test whether joint redundancy better correlates with the fast versus slow learning phase.
Nevertheless, our results revealed learning rates that are comparable to the literature (26–28, 31). The data also revealed that
learning in the dominant hand was significantly faster than that
in the nondominant hand (23). Second, trends indicate that some
directions appear to be easier to learn, and like joint redundancy,
there is a large subject-specific variability in the data, the implications of which are discussed in Relating Joint Redundancy and
Motor Learning.
Relating Joint Redundancy and Motor Learning. The strong subjectwise correlations observed in both the dynamic and kinematic
learning tasks support the hypothesis that joint redundancy
supports motor learning. Although our data are fundamentally
correlative in nature, we were able to exploit a feature in our
experiment that involved the use of the dominant and nondominant hand that resulted in differences in learning rates
and redundancy. Lending further credence to the hypothesis,
we found that the smaller redundancy in the nondominant
hand was associated with slower learning. Moreover, the differences in learning and redundancy were also correlated (Fig.
5D). In addition, we showed similar group-wise differences in
the visuomotor adaptation task showing smaller redundancy for
below-mean learners compared with above-mean learners. This
result notwithstanding, we do not claim that redundancy is the
sole source of differences in motor learning. Kinematic learning is faster than dynamic learning despite smaller redundancy
in the kinematic task compared with the dynamic task, and
is likely to reflect differences in the mechanisms involved in
learning these two perturbations that involve the learning of
different internal models (27), with joint redundancy being a
common factor that confers greater flexibility to explore motor
space. Additionally, we also observed differences in the degree
of redundancy and learning across directions. Although these
differences were not statistically significant (they were also
poorly correlated), these results suggest that redundancy not
only possesses an active component that correlates with learning
Singh et al. PNAS | December 13, 2016 | vol. 113 | no. 50 | 14417
but also a passive component that reflects differences in the
biomechanics.
Although we observed strong correlations between joint
redundancy and motor learning, our results did not show a correlation between task-space variability and motor learning. In contrast, recent work by Wu et al. (16), using both reinforcement
learning and error-based supervised learning, emphasizes the
selective role of task relevant variability in motor learning.
Although the basis of differences between these studies remain
unclear, it is interesting to note that other studies suggest that
task variability does not correlate with motor learning (see ref.
32 for a meta-analysis). Further research would be required
to reconcile these points of view. In addition, although it is
not still mechanistically clear how joint redundancy facilitates
motor learning, we suggest that such active exploration of
task-irrelevant space may be essential to motor learning, while
simultaneously ensuring optimal motor performance by minimizing task-space variability. This possibility notwithstanding,
we believe that this relation between null-space variability and
motor learning can be leveraged to enhance motor learning skills
and motor rehabilitation.
Materials and Methods
Subjects. All subjects were paid for participation and gave informed consent
in accordance with the guidelines of the Human Ethics Committee of the
Indian Institute of Science that approved the protocol. Sixty na¨ıve subjects
participated in the study (aged 22–70 y; 42 male and 18 female). In experiment 1, 40 subjects (30 male and 10 female, all right-handed) performed
a visuomotor task and in experiment 2, 10 subjects (5 male and 5 female;
all right-handed) performed a generalized visuomotor task. In experiment
3, 10 subjects (7 male and 3 female; 6 right-handed, 4 left-handed subjects)
performed the force-field experiment first with their dominant and after a
gap of ∼5 d with their nondominant hands. Handedness was tested using
the modified Edinburgh Handedness Index (33).
Experimental Setup. In experiment 1, subjects sat on a chair with their hand
placed on the table (Fig. S1A). A monitor that displayed the targets and the
cursor movement was placed in front of the subjects. The experiment was
performed using the psychophysics toolbox (34) that displayed visual stimuli, sampled, and stored the data and other behavioral parameters. Hand
positions and joint angles were recorded using an electromagnetic position
and orientation tracking device (Liberty; Polhemus).
In all other experiments, subjects sat on a chair while their chins were
supported by a chin rest, and their heads were locked with head bars on
both sides of their temple as shown in Fig. S1A. Subjects looked down
on a semitransparent mirror on which they saw the targets while they
moved a robotic arm handle (KINARM End-Point Robot; BKIN) in a horizontal plane below the plane of the mirror. Targets were presented by an
inverted monitor above the mirror setup, which gave the impression that
the targets appeared in a virtual plane below the mirror aligned to the
plane in which the robotic arm handle moved. All experiments were performed using TEMPO/VideoSYNC software (Reflective Computing) that displayed visual stimuli and sampled and stored the data and other behavioral
parameters in real time at a resolution of 1.04 ms. Hand positions and joint
angles were recorded (spatial resolution of 7.62 mm) using an electromagnetic position and orientation tracking device (Liberty; Polhemus) interfacing with TEMPO in real time at 240 Hz.
Experimental Paradigm. In experiment 1, trials were divided into three
phases: baseline or preadaptation, adaptation, and postadaptation. All subjects performed ∼10 practice trials. Subjects performed about 100 trials per
session, with a typical session lasting about 15 min. Each trial started with
the presentation of a square fixation box (1 cm) at the center of a screen
where subjects had to fixate both their hand and eye. After successful fixation, a square target of length 1 cm was displayed randomly in any one
of two locations that uniformly spanned a circle of 20-cm radius around
the central fixation box. Trials were aborted if a premature movement was
made. Auditory feedback was given when the subject performed a trial
correctly.
In all other experiments, trials were divided into three phases: baseline
or preadaptation, adaptation, and postadaptation. All subjects performed
∼30 practice trials. Subjects performed about 400 trials per session, with a
typical session lasting between 1.5–2 h. Each trial started with the presentation of a square fixation box (0.4 cm) at the center of a screen where the
subjects had to fixate both their eye and the robotic end-effector. After successful fixation, a square target (0.7 cm) was displayed randomly in any one
of eight locations that uniformly spanned a circle of 15-cm radius around
the central fixation box. Similar to experiment 1, trials were aborted if a
premature movement was made. Auditory feedback was given when the
subject performed a trial correctly.
To minimize the effect of transfer of learning (35), subjects were
always exposed to washout trials after perturbation trials. In addition,
typically and ∼5-d gap was given between recording the dominant and
nondominant hand.
Visuomotor Perturbation. During visuomotor perturbation (29), the cursor
movement is rotated according to Eq. 1,

Px
Py

=

cos θ − sin θ
sin θ cos θ
 px
py

, [1]
where Px , Py correspond to the position of the cursor, px , py correspond
to the actual position of the hand, and θ denotes the perturbation angle
about the center of work space with θ equal to 45◦
. This perturbation also
led to a trajectory error and to compensate the subjects altered their hand
trajectory.
Force-Field Perturbation. During force-field perturbation (31), the robot
produced viscous curl forces depending on the instantaneous hand velocity as in Eq. 2,

Fx
Fy

=

0 −K
K 0
 x˙
y˙

, [2]
where Fx , Fy correspond to the forces exerted on the robotic arm, x˙, y˙ correspond to the velocity components of hand, and K denotes the force perturbation coefficient along the orthogonal directions with K equal to 20 Ns/m.
This force-field perturbation disturbed the hand trajectory.
Quantifying Redundancy. To calculate the joint-space variability in different
directions, a 2D forward-kinematics model was created for the human arm.
The model is given by

x
y

=

l1 cos(θ1) + l2 cos(θ2) + l3 cos(θ3) + l4 cos(θ4)
l1 sin(θ1) + l2 sin(θ2) + l3 sin(θ3) + l4 sin(θ4)

, [3]
where the four joints rotations are clavicle protraction–retraction (θ1),
shoulder horizontal abduction–adduction (θ2), elbow flexion–extension (θ3),
and wrist medial–lateral (θ4) (Fig. S1B). In experiment 1, we also incorporated a fifth joint-index figure abduction–adduction, and accordingly
extended Eqs. 3 and 5. The distribution of variability in joint-space was computed for baseline trials for each of the different directions at the maximum
reach velocity. The mean joint configuration across trials, along each of the
directions, was computed at the peak velocity v and is denoted by θ¯v
. The
deviation of the joint configuration for a trial k, ∆θk, is obtained by subtracting the joint configuration at the peak velocity, θ
v
k
, from the mean as
below:
∆θk = θ¯v − θ
v
k
. [4]
Based on the 2D forward-kinematics model, the Jacobian matrix at peak
velocity was computed as
J(θ¯v
) =


∂x
∂θ1
∂x
∂θ2
∂x
∂θ3
∂x
∂θ4
∂y
∂θ1
∂y
∂θ2
∂y
∂θ3
∂y
∂θ4

. [5]
The joint configuration vector ξi
lying in the null-space of the Jacobian
matrix was computed from
J(θ¯v
) ξi = 0. [6]
For each trial, the sum of the component of ∆θk along the null-space
directions is given by
θR =
Xm
i=1
h∆θk, ξii ξi
, m = 2 or 3. [7]
We quantify redundancy as the sum of the squares of θR across all of the
trials divided by the number of trials n. Mathematically, this is written as
N(J) =
Xn
i=1
(θR)
2
n
. [8]
14418 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613383113 Singh et al.
NEUROSCIENCE
In this work, the scalar N(J) is used as a measure of redundancy space
as θR, from which N(J) is derived, lies in the null-space, and does not affect
task-space motion (Fig. S1C).
Task-Space Variability. We quantified the task-space variability from the
hand trajectory when it reached its peak velocity. The SD of the perpendicular distance of this point from the straight line joining the start and end
of the trajectory was used as the metric of task-space variability.
Quantifying Learning. The error at the peak velocity was calculated as the
perpendicular distance of the hand trajectory at peak velocity from the
straight line joining the central fixation box to the target location. The error,
denoted by f(n), is related to the trial number by the following equation.
f(x) = ae−βx
. [9]
The above equation represents a first-order learning process, and in
this work, we concentrate on β, which represents the intrinsic learning
for a subject. To compute the population learning in perturbation trials, errors were fitted with an exponential fit using robust least-squares
method, goodness of fit for the population learning curve for visuomotor learning (r
2 = 0.95), generalized visuomotor learning (r
2 = 0.90),
and force-field learning (r
2 = 0.93). To test for the significance of the
fits, we plotted the logarithm of error f(n) versus the number of trials n assuming the above-mentioned exponential learning model. P values of the obtained linear regressions were <0.0005 in all experiment
conditions.
Statistical Analysis. All of the correlation analyses used Pearson’s correlation. For pairwise comparisons between groups, we first checked for normality in the data using the Lilliefors test, and when it satisfied normality,
we performed a pairwise two-tailed t test.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Dr. Atul Gopal PA for the initial setup of
the experiment and Dr. Pratik Mutha and the reviewers for helpful comments on the paper. This work was supported by grants from the Robert
Bosch Centre for Cyber Physical Systems (to A.G. and P.S.) and the Department of Biotechnology–Indian Institute of Science partnership program
and by the Department of Science & Technology grant Intensification of
Research in High Priority Area (to A.M.).
1. Harris CM, Wolpert DM (1998) Signal-dependent noise determines motor planning.
Nature 394(6695):780–784.
2. Tseng Y, Scholz JP, Schoner G (2002) Goal-equivalent joint coordination in pointing:
Affect of vision and arm dominance. Motor Control 6(2):183–207.
3. Haggard P, Hutchinson K, Stein J (1995) Patterns of coordinated multi-joint movement. Exp Brain Res 107(2):254–266.
4. Cole KJ, Abbs JH (1986) Coordination of three-joint digit movements for rapid fingerthumb grasp. J Neurophysiol 55(6):1407–1423.
5. Black DP, Smith BA, Wu J, Ulrich BD (2007) Uncontrolled manifold analysis of
segmental angle variability during walking: Preadolescents with and without down
syndrome. Exp Brain Res 183(4):511–521.
6. Yang JF, Scholz JP, Latash ML (2007) The role of kinematic redundancy in adaptation
of reaching. Exp Brain Res 176(1):54–69.
7. Park J, Wu YH, Lewis MM, Huang X, Latash ML (2012) Changes in multifinger interaction and coordination in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurophysiol 108(3):915–924.
8. Todorov E, Jordan MI (2002) Optimal feedback control as a theory of motor coordination. Nat Neurosci 5(11):1226–1235.
9. Todorov E (2004) Optimality principles in sensorimotor control. Nat Neurosci 7(9):
907–915.
10. Liu D, Todorov E (2007) Evidence for the flexible sensorimotor strategies predicted by
optimal feedback control. J Neurosci 27(35):9354–9368.
11. Diedrichsen J, Shadmehr R, Ivry RB (2010) The coordination of movement: Optimal
feedback control and beyond. Trends Cogn Sci 14(1):31–39.
12. Todorov E, Jordan MI (2002) A minimal intervention principle for coordinated movement. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2002, eds Becker S, Thrun S,
Obermayer K (Neural Information Processing Systems Foundation, La Jolla, CA),
pp 27–34.
13. Scholz JP, Schoner G (1999) The uncontrolled manifold concept: Identifying control ¨
variables for a functional task. Exp Brain Res 126(3):289–306.
14. Latash ML, Scholz JP, Schoner G (2002) Motor control strategies revealed in the struc- ¨
ture of motor variability. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 30(1):26–31.
15. Latash ML, Scholz JP, Schoner G (2007) Toward a new theory of motor synergies.
Motor Control 11(3):276.
16. Wu HG, Miyamoto YR, Castro LNG, Olveczky BP, Smith MA (2014) Temporal structure ¨
of motor variability is dynamically regulated and predicts motor learning ability. Nat
Neurosci 17(2):312–321.
17. Herzfeld DJ, Shadmehr R (2014) Motor variability is not noise, but grist for the learning mill. Nat Neurosci 17(2):149–150.
18. Tumer EC, Brainard MS (2007) Performance variability enables adaptive plasticity of
‘crystallized’ adult birdsong. Nature 450(7173):1240–1244.
19. Cashaback JG, McGregor HR, Gribble PL (2015) The human motor system alters
its reaching movement plan for task-irrelevant, positional forces. J Neurophysiol
113(7):2137–2149.
20. Therrien AS, Wolpert DM, Bastian AJ (2016) Effective reinforcement learning following cerebellar damage requires a balance between exploration and motor noise.
Brain 139(1) :101–114.
21. Sutton RS, Barto AG (1998) Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
22. Barto AG (1994) Reinforcement learning control. Curr Opin Neurobiol 4(6):
888–893.
23. Sainburg RL (2002) Evidence for a dynamic-dominance hypothesis of handedness.
Exp Brain Res 142(2):241–258.
24. Whiting HTA (1983) Human Motor Actions: Bernstein Reassessed (Elsevier, Amsterdam), Vol 17.
25. Latash ML (2008) Synergy (Oxford Univ Press, New York).
26. Shadmehr R, Smith MA, Krakauer JW (2010) Error correction, sensory prediction, and
adaptation in motor control. Annu Rev Neurosci 33:89–108.
27. Krakauer JW, Ghilardi MF, Ghez C (1999) Independent learning of internal models for
kinematic and dynamic control of reaching. Nat Neurosci 2(11):1026–1031.
28. Krakauer JW, Pine ZM, Ghilardi MF, Ghez C (2000) Learning of visuomotor transformations for vectorial planning of reaching trajectories. J Neurosci 20(23):
8916–8924.
29. Mazzoni P, Krakauer JW (2006) An implicit plan overrides an explicit strategy during
visuomotor adaptation. J Neurosci 26(14):3642–3645.
30. Smith MA, Ghazizadeh A, Shadmehr R (2006) Interacting adaptive processes with different timescales underlie short-term motor learning. PLoS Biol 4(6):e179.
31. Shadmehr R, Mussa-Ivaldi FA (1994) Adaptive representation of dynamics during
learning of a motor task. J Neurosci 14(5):3208–3224.
32. He K, et al. (2016) The statistical determinants of the speed of motor learning. PLoS
Comput Biol 12(9):e1005023.
33. Salmaso D, Longoni AM (1985) Problems in the assessment of hand preference. Cortex
21(4):533–549.
34. Brainard DH (1997) The psychophysics toolbox. Spat Vis 10:433–436.
35. Criscimagna-Hemminger SE, Donchin O, Gazzaniga MS, Shadmehr R (2003) Learned
dynamics of reaching movements generalize from dominant to nondominant arm.
J Neurophysiol 89(1):168–176.
Singh et al. PNAS | December 13, 2016 | vol. 113 | no. 50 | 14419