Timing of the brain events underlying access to
consciousness during the attentional blink
Claire Sergent1, Sylvain Baillet2 & Stanislas Dehaene1
In the phenomenon of attentional blink, identical visual stimuli are sometimes fully perceived and sometimes not detected at all.
This phenomenon thus provides an optimal situation to study the fate of stimuli not consciously perceived and the differences
between conscious and nonconscious processing. We correlated behavioral visibility ratings and recordings of event-related
potentials to study the temporal dynamics of access to consciousness. Intact early potentials (P1 and N1) were evoked by unseen
words, suggesting that these brain events are not the primary correlates of conscious perception. However, we observed a rapid
divergence around 270 ms, after which several brain events were evoked solely by seen words. Thus, we suggest that the
transition toward access to consciousness relates to the optional triggering of a late wave of activation that spreads through a
distributed network of cortical association areas.
A central question in the study of conscious perception relates to
the neural basis of conscious access: what are the neural processes
that allow stimulus information to become available for explicit
report? Imaging studies have shown that conscious access is accompanied both by increased activity in perceptual areas1–5 and by the
specific involvement of a largely distributed frontoparietal network
with increased functional connectivity1,6–8. Which of those observed
effects corresponds to the primary correlates of conscious access?
According to some authors, the difference between conscious and
nonconscious processing primarily resides in different levels of activation in early stimulus-specific areas4,9. Others, however, emphasize that
these early events can also be observed under nonconscious conditions1,6 and therefore suggest that the critical correlate of conscious
access is a late, optional triggering of a ‘second stage’ of processing
involving a distributed frontoparietal network10–12.
To disentangle theories predicting an early, gradual correlate of
conscious access and theories predicting late divergences, we took
advantage of the temporal resolution afforded by event-related potentials (ERP) in an attentional blink experiment13,14. In this procedure,
two masked visual targets are presented successively. For short stimulus
onset asynchrony (SOA) between both targets (200 to 500 ms),
identification of the first target (T1) hinders the detection of the
second target (T2), although T2 is easily seen when no task on T1 is
required. The attentional blink provides an ideal situation in which
identical stimuli lead to different conscious reports. Indeed, in previous
experiments in which we asked participants to rate the visibility of a
target word (T2) on a continuous scale, we showed that during the
attentional blink, T2 was sometimes fully perceived but sometimes not
detected at all15. In the present ERP study, we searched for the neural
events underlying this bimodal distribution of conscious reports.
Previous ERP studies of the attentional blink16–18 examined only
specific ERP components and their preservation or elimination during
the attentional blink. By contrast, here we were able to examine the
complete temporal sequence of brain events leading to conscious
access. We achieved this by comparing trials in which the target word
T2 was present (whether it was seen or unseen) with trials in which it
was absent and replaced by a blank screen.
RESULTS
Bimodal distribution of conscious reports
We used a short (258 ms) and a long (688 ms) SOA between T1 and T2.
We used two task conditions: single task (subjects were asked to
respond to T2 only) and dual task (subjects were asked to respond to
both T2 and T1; see Fig. 1 for summary of attentional blink procedure).
T2 was a number word and could be either present or absent; in the
latter case, the word was simply replaced by a blank screen. The task on
T2, performed shortly after T2 was presented, was to rate its visibility
on a continuous scale (see Methods).
Mean subjective visibility on the scale showed a classical attentional
blink pattern (Fig. 1): when T2 was present, mean visibility dropped
markedly at short T1–T2 SOA only when participants had to perform a
task on T1 (task by SOA interaction: F1,15 ¼ 62.5; P o 0.0001). When
T2 was absent, responses on the scale were all grouped towards the
lowest visibility degree in all conditions. When T2 was present in the
single-task condition, responses were all grouped towards high-visibility degrees. However, during the attentional blink (dual task, short
SOA), a very different, bimodal pattern was observed: on some trials,
participants gave high visibility ratings, close to those obtained outside
the attentional blink, whereas on the others, they used the lowest
visibility ratings (24.8% of the responses at 0% visibility; Fig. 1). We
Received 24 June; accepted 24 August; published online 11 September 2005; doi:10.1038/nn1549
1Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale Unite´ 562, Cognitive Neuroimaging, Service Hospitalier Fre´de´ric Joliot, Commissariat a` l’Energie Atomique,
4, place du Ge´ne´ral Leclerc, 91401 Orsay Cedex, France. 2Cognitive Neuroscience and Brain Imaging Laboratory, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UPR 640-
LENA, Hoˆpital de la Salpeˆtrie`re, 47, boulevard de l’Hoˆpital 75651 Paris Cedex 13, France. Correspondence should be addressed to C.S. (sergent@shfj.cea.fr).
NATURE NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 8 [ NUMBER 10 [ OCTOBER 2005 1391
ARTICLES
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience