ARTICLES
Ligand-gated ion channels are multi-subunit, allosteric proteins
that undergo agonist-promoted conformational changes between
closed and open states1. The earliest mechanistic framework for
agonist action suggested that binding and receptor activation were
different steps, leading to the distinction between ‘agonist affinity’
and ‘agonist efficacy’2. Receptors were thought to exist in conformationally and functionally distinct inactive and active states3,
with the binding of agonist promoting an increase in the relative
proportion of the active state4. These concepts contributed to the
formation of the Monod-Wyman-Changeux (MWC) model of
allosteric proteins5, which predicts that partial agonists shift inactive receptors toward the active state less efficiently than do full
agonists. In contrast to the MWC model, the Koshland-NemethyFilmer (KNF) theory asserts that receptors undergo sequential,
non-concerted changes6, with different ligands inducing specific
and perhaps different conformational states. According to extensive
kinetic analysis of voltage-activated Shaker potassium channels and
Ca2+-activated potassium channels, activation proceeds as a series
of transitions through discrete states linked by an MWC-like mechanism7–9. For ligand-gated ion channels, similar models have been
proposed, but there is insufficient experimental evidence to accurately define the gating process.
Ionotropic glutamate receptors (iGluRs) are ligand-gated ion
channels that couple the energy of agonist binding at the ligandbinding core to the opening of a transmembrane ion pore10.
AMPA-subtype iGluRs mediate most of the fast excitatory synaptic transmission in the mammalian brain and have been the focus
of extensive pharmacological scrutiny11. iGluRs, which likely comprise four subunits, have semi-autonomous membrane-spanning
and ligand-binding domains (Fig. 1a)10. AMPA receptors are
appropriate for studying the molecular basis of partial agonism
because the function of individual receptors can be measured by
single-channel recording, and the ligand-binding core can be
genetically excised and studied by high-resolution crystallographic techniques12,13.
Previous studies show that kainate behaves as a partial agonist at
AMPA receptors12,14,15, and mutations in the agonist binding site
alter the relative efficacy of AMPA, glutamate and kainate16.
Interpreting these studies is complicated, however, by the fact that
AMPA, kainate and glutamate are chemically distinct and bind to
different sub-sites within the ligand binding pocket. Furthermore,
compared with other agonists, kainate stabilizes a unique conformational state of the ligand-binding core due to the presence of its
pyrrolidine ring and isopropenyl group. Although the aforementioned studies help to explain the action of kainate on AMPA receptors, the mechanism by which partial agonists produce submaximal
responses remains to be determined. Such an analysis would be
facilitated by studies in which subtle and graded conformational
changes in the ligand-binding core are correlated with changes in
activity at the ion channel. In this regard, we have found that the 5-
substituted willardiines (Fig. 1b)17–19, variations on the parent
willardiine from Acacia willardiana and Mimosa asperata20, are
ideal tools for elucidating the molecular basis of partial agonist
action at AMPA receptors. Previous studies have shown that
willardiines are partial agonists and that they result in graded levels
of desensitization as a consequence of single-atom substitutions.
Here we present crystallographic and physiological studies on the
GluR2 ligand-binding core and on the intact receptor with a series
of willardiine compounds. Our data show that the 5-substituted
willardiines stabilize distinct conformational sub-states of the lig1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics and 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Columbia University, 650 West 168 Street, New York, New York
10032, USA. 3Department of Pharmacology, Emory University, School of Medicine, Rollins Research Center, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA. 4Laboratory of Cellular
and Molecular Neurophysiology, National Institute of Child Health and Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. Correspondence
should be addressed to E.G. (jeg52@columbia.edu).
Structural basis for partial agonist action at
ionotropic glutamate receptors
Rongsheng Jin1, Tue G Banke3, Mark L Mayer4, Stephen F Traynelis3 & Eric Gouaux1,2
An unresolved problem in understanding neurotransmitter receptor function concerns the mechanism(s) by which full and partial
agonists elicit different amplitude responses at equal receptor occupancy. The widely held view of ‘partial agonism’ posits that
resting and active states of the receptor are in equilibrium, and partial agonists simply do not shift the equilibrium toward the
active state as efficaciously as full agonists. Here we report findings from crystallographic and electrophysiological studies of the
mechanism of activation of an AMPA-subtype glutamate receptor ion channel. In these experiments, we used 5-substituted
willardiines, a series of partial agonists that differ by only a single atom. Our results show that the GluR2 ligand-binding core can
adopt a range of ligand-dependent conformational states, which in turn control the open probability of discrete subconductance
states of the intact ion channel. Our findings thus provide a structure-based model of partial agonism.
NATURE NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 6 | NUMBER 8 | AUGUST 2003 803
© 2003 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience