© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
nature neuroscience • volume 2 no 1 • january 1999 31
Excitatory transmission in the vertebrate central nervous system
is mediated by actions of glutamate on AMPA (a-amino-3-
hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate) and NMDA (Nmethyl-D-aspartate) receptor subtypes. These receptors have
different roles in transmission, plasticity and toxicity1. In the hippocampus2–4 and other brain regions5,6, the ratio of AMPAreceptor- to NMDA-receptor-mediated transmission is initially
low and increases over development. Furthermore, many synaptic events, particularly early in development, are mediated by the
activation of only NMDA receptors2,3,5–8. Such responses are proposed to occur at structures termed postsynaptically silent synapses, because transmission can only be detected if the postsynaptic
membrane potential is raised above the resting level. At resting
membrane potentials, the NMDA receptor pore is largely blocked
by extracellular magnesium9, and hence transmitter reaching
only NMDA receptors will produce little response. The prevalence of pure NMDA responses measured electrophysiologically
decreases during development2,3,5,6. Long-term potentiation
(LTP), a form of activity-dependent synaptic plasticity, can add an
AMPA-receptor-mediated component of transmission to pure
NMDA-receptor-mediated responses7,8. These electrophysiological observations suggest that NMDA receptors are present in
synapses before AMPA receptors and that during development
AMPA receptors are progressively added, possibly through an
LTP-like process.
However, alternative theories are possible. One scenario proposes that both AMPA and NMDA receptors coincide in their
appearance at synapses, but early in development only low concentrations of glutamate reach synapses, concentrations sufficient to activate primarily NMDA receptors. As these receptors
have higher affinity for glutamate than AMPA receptors, this view
is biophysically plausible10. A low concentration of transmitter
could reach receptors either because of a low concentration
released by vesicles or because of geometrical relations between
release site and receptor location (for example, spillover from
nearby synapses11 or increased synaptic cleft separation). Another possibility is that both receptors are on synapses, but early in
development AMPA receptors are functionally silent, either
because they lack an associated protein (such as glutamate receptor interacting protein12) or because they lack a necessary posttranslational modification (such as phosphorylation13). We have
directly tested the hypothesis that NMDA receptors (NMDA-Rs)
are present at synapses before AMPA receptors (AMPA-Rs) and
that the latter are progressively added during development.
Results
We have used post-embedding immunogold electron microscopy
(Methods) to examine glutamate receptors at CA1 hippocampal
asymmetric synapses at different times in postnatal development
(postnatal day (P)2, P10 and 5 weeks). Most synapses showed
immunoreactivity for NMDA-Rs (Fig. 1, Table 1). Furthermore,
there were no significant changes over the ages examined. We
found a similar number of gold particles per synapse, number of
gold particles per µm of postsynaptic membrane and percentage
of synapses labeled at all ages studied (Fig. 1, Table 1, see also
Fig. 4). This was true for antibodies directed against NR1 and
NR2A/B subunits. These results argue that the number of NMDARs per synapse remains constant between P2 and 5 weeks.
In contrast to NMDA-Rs, AMPA-R immunoreactivity was
low at P2 and P10 and high at 5 weeks (Fig. 2, Table 1). For
articles
Selective acquisition of AMPA receptors
over postnatal development suggests
a molecular basis for silent synapses
R. S. Petralia1, J. A. Esteban2, Y.-X. Wang1, J. G. Partridge3, H.-M. Zhao1, R. J. Wenthold1
and R. Malinow2
1 Lab. of Neurochemistry, NIDCD, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA
2 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA
3 Dept. Pharmacol., Vanderbilt Univ., Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA
The first two authors contributed equally to this project.
Correspondence should be addressed to R.M. (malinow@cshl.org)
Early in postnatal development, glutamatergic synapses transmit primarily through NMDA
receptors. As development progresses, synapses acquire AMPA receptor function. The molecular
basis of these physiological observations is not known. Here we examined single excitatory synapses
with immunogold electron-microscopic analysis of AMPA and NMDA receptors along with
electrophysiological measurements. Early in postnatal development, a significant fraction of
excitatory synapses had NMDA receptors and lacked AMPA receptors. As development progressed,
synapses acquired AMPA receptors with little change in NMDA receptor number. Thus, synapses
with NMDA receptors but no AMPA receptors can account for the electrophysiologically observed
‘silent synapse’.
© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
instance, for AMPA-R subunit GluR1 immunoreactivity, the average number of gold grains per synapse increased 1.7-fold from
P2 to P10 and increased 2-fold further from P10 to 5 weeks. In
addition, the fraction of synapses containing AMPA-R
immunoreactivity increased with development (from 16% at P2
to 50% at 5 weeks, in the case of GluR1, and from 44% to 75%
in the case of the AMPA-R subunits GluR2/3, see Table 1). Similar results were obtained with two additional antibodies, one
recognizing GluR1 and the other GluR2 (not shown). This indicates that the changes in immunoreactivity at different ages are
not likely to be due to developmental changes in epitopes of
AMPA-Rs. This developmental difference in labeling between
AMPA-Rs and NMDA-Rs was verified with double labeling. Early
in development, synapses containing NMDA-R immunoreactivity and little or no AMPA-R immunoreactivity were common
(Fig. 3f and g), whereas at 5 weeks, immunolabeling for AMPARs and NMDA-Rs was comparable (Fig. 3h).
These data strongly support the view that the developmental
increase in AMPA-R-mediated transmission2–6 is due to an
increase in the number of AMPA-Rs at synapses. What do these
data say regarding the nature of silent synapses? Can one conclude directly from these anatomical data that many synapses
contain NMDA-Rs and lack AMPA-Rs? Immunogold electron
microscopy only detects a fraction of receptors on any synapse.
Thus, it is possible that all synapses have AMPA-Rs, but because
of low detection, some postsynaptic densities fail to show
immunoreactivity. This difficulty in determining unambiguously the existence of synapses that lack AMPA-Rs has been recognized in other studies on AMPA-R and NMDA-R expression at
synapses14,15. We have taken several approaches to determine if
there exist synapses lacking AMPA-Rs and whether their prevalence changes during postnatal development.
First, we analyzed the frequency distribution of immunoparticles (Fig. 4). The general features indicated in Table 1 are shown
in greater detail in these distributions. For instance, tissue analyzed for GluR1 or GluR2/3 generally had many more synapses
lacking immunoreactivity compared to tissue analyzed for NR1.
The observed fraction of synapses lacking immunoparticles (bin
zero) decreases with age for GluR1 and GluR2/3 while remaining constant for NR1 (Fig. 4a). From these observed distributions, we have estimated the fraction of synapses truly lacking
receptors. We have fitted the observed frequency distributions to
a simple model (Methods), assuming that the observed particle
distribution is a random low-detection sampling of the true
receptor distribution. From these fits, we can estimate the fraction
of synapses truly lacking receptors, FLR (Fig. 4a). For GluR1
immunolabeling, we found that FLR is high at P2 (71%) and
decreases with age (P10, 50%; 5 weeks, 29%). Similar age-related changes were observed for GluR2/3 immunolabeling (P2, 44%;
P10, 34%; 5 weeks, 12%). The lower FLR estimated using
GluR2/3 immunolabeling is consistent with findings that a significant fraction of AMPA receptors lack GluR1 subunit, whereas most of them contain GluR2 subunit16. Thus, some synapses
may have AMPA receptors only containing GluR2/3. For NR1,
FLR was low at all ages (<10%). We can examine this model’s
robustness by calculating the estimated FLR after simulated lowdetection sampling from the observed distribution (which itself
is already a low-detection sampling from the true distribution).
For GluR1, the calculated FLR was largely independent of detection level (Fig. 4b), supporting the accuracy of the estimated
value. For GluR2/3 (P10 and 5 weeks) and for NR1 (all ages), the
FLR increased somewhat with lower detection levels, suggesting
that the true FLR value may be slightly lower than the estimated
one (Methods). These analyses of the observed immunograin
distribution therefore support the view that a significant fraction
of synapses have NMDA-Rs and lack AMPA-Rs, particularly early
in postnatal development.
To complement the estimates reached from the low-detection
analysis, we maximized AMPA-R detection by combining five
AMPA-R antibodies and by modifying several steps in the
immunolabeling procedure (see Fig. 3 legend). With these modifications, the labeling was considerably increased (Fig. 3). However, at P10, 49% of synapses still lacked immunolabeling. At 5
weeks, only 9% lacked immunolabeling (Fig. 5). These values
coincide well with the FLR estimates reached from individual
articles
P2 P10 5 weeks
NR1
NR2A/B
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
Fig. 1. Immunogold labeling of NMDA receptors in the CA1 stratum radiatum of the hippocampus. Postembedding immungold labeling was done using antibodies to NR1 (a, d, f) and NR2A/B
(b, c, e, g) with 10 nm gold, at postnatal day 2 (P2; a–c), postnatal
day 10 (P10; d, e) and 5 weeks (f, g). p, presynaptic terminal. Line
scale is 0.2 µm. Micrographs were chosen to illustrate the moderate
level of NMDA-R labeling maintained from P2 to 5 weeks.
Table 1. Summary of immunogold labeling for NMDA-Rs
and AMPA-Rs.
P2 P10 5 weeks
NR1 Particles/synapse 0.98 1.35 1.13
Percent synapses labeled 62 69 63
Particles/labeled synapse 1.59 1.96 1.79
Number of synapses 60 266 594
NR2A/B Particles/synapse 1.66 1.33 1.42
Percent synapses labeled 67 66 70
Particles/labeled synapse 2.48 2.03 2.04
Number of synapses 93 231 611
GluR1 Particles/synapse 0.27 0.46 0.92
Percent synapses labeled 16 28 50
Particles/labeled synapse 1.64 1.66 1.82
Number of synapses 67 251 546
GluR2/3 Particles/synapse 0.94 0.69 2.07
Percent synapses labeled 44 38 75
Particles/labeled synapse 2.13 1.80 2.75
Number of synapses 52 227 541
The average number of particles per synapse and the percentage of labeled
synapses were significantly different (t-test and chi-square, respectively)
between 5 weeks and the other two ages in the case of GluR1 and GluR2/3
antibodies. For GluR1 immunolabeling, the percentage of labeled synapses
was also significantly different between P2 and P10. No significant difference
among P2, P10 or 5 weeks was found for NMDA-R labeling.
32 nature neuroscience • volume 2 no 1 • january 1999
© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
AMPA-R antibodies. Simulated low-detection sampling from
these data (Fig. 5, inset) produced similar estimates for fraction
of synapses lacking AMPA-Rs, regardless of detection level. Thus,
these results further support the presence of synapses lacking
AMPA-Rs early in development.
In the transition from P10 to 5 weeks, there was an increase
in the average number of immunoparticles in synapses containing labeling (Fig. 5). We wished to relate these anatomical observations to physiological responses from single synapses. Wholecell recordings were obtained from CA1 neurons from rat
hippocampal slices at P2, P10 and 5 weeks. AMPA-R-mediated
responses from single synapses were evoked by locally applying a
hypertonic sucrose solution under visual guidance and holding
the postsynaptic cell at hyperpolarized potentials (Methods). The
sucrose was directed at dendritic regions in stratum radiatum
~100 µm from the cell body with a patch pipette (regions comparable to those from which anatomical measurements were
obtained). The resulting miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mepscs) varied in amplitude (Fig. 6), as reported17. The
frequency of responses decreased more than fourfold when the
sucrose pipette was moved 50 µm away from the recorded neuron, indicating that the activated synapses were close to the
pipette (data not shown). There was little difference in mean
mepsc amplitude across the different ages examined (Fig. 6). This
result agrees with recent observations of spontaneous mepscs
recorded from the whole cell4. The same mean mepsc amplitude
at younger ages, despite the smaller number (and density) of
AMPA-Rs at labeled synapses, indicates that the impact of individual AMPA-Rs on a single-synapse response is larger earlier in
development. Thus, these observations argue against the view
that the lower AMPA-R-mediated component of transmission
in young tissue results from AMPA-Rs of diminished function,
either from receptor modulation or low transmitter delivery.
Rather, our data indicate that receptor function is greater in
young animals and that the lower level of AMPA-R-mediated
transmission is due to the small fraction of synapses containing
AMPA-Rs. This interpretation is also in agreement with an
increase in mepsc frequency over development4 (also see Fig 6).
Discussion
In this study, we have examined the molecular basis for the developmental profile of AMPA and NMDA responses at glutamatergic synapses. In the hippocampus and other brain regions,
transmission is initially mediated largely by NMDA-Rs, and over
development the AMPA-R-mediated component of the synaptic response increases. We have used the post-embedding
immunogold technique to test quantitatively the hypothesis that
this is due to an initial synaptic presence of NMDA-Rs and that
during development the presence of AMPA-Rs at synapses
increases. The most direct line of evidence supporting this view
is that the amount of immunolabeling per synapse (averaged
articles
P2 P10 5 weeks
Glu R1
a
GluR2/3
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
Fig. 2. Immunogold labeling of AMPA receptors in the CA1 stratum
radiatum of the hippocampus. Postembedding immungold labeling
was done using antibodies to GluR1 C-terminus (a, d, g) and
GluR2/3 (b, c, e, f, h, i) with 10 nm gold, at postnatal day 2 (P2;
a–c), postnatal day 10 (P10; d–f), and 5 weeks (g–i). p, presynaptic
terminal. Line scale is 0.2 µm. Micrographs were chosen to illustrate
the major trend, that is, a large increase in labeling for AMPA-Rs at
5 weeks compared to P2/P10 (a–f versus g–i).
Fig. 3. AMPA-R immunolabeling in high-sensitivity conditions.
Immunogold labeling for AMPA-R was optimized by using five antibodies recognizing the N-terminal epitope of GluR1 subunit, GluR2,
GluR2/3, GluR4 subunits and AMPA-extracellular loop (Methods).
The incubation temperature for primary and secondary antibodies
was increased to 37°C. Immunogold labeling of the CA1 stratum
radiatum of the hippocampus using antibodies to an AMPA-R mix
(a–e, 5-nm gold), and double-labeling (f–h) with AMPA-R mix (15-
nm gold) plus NR2A/B (5 nm; arrowheads), at P10 (a–c, f, g; no gold
seen in b) and 5 weeks (Ad; d, e, h). p, presynaptic terminal. Line
scales are 0.2 µm (a, b) and 0.1 µm (c–e, f–h). Micrograph (c) is a
high magnification of the synapse (arrow) in micrograph (a).
Micrographs were chosen to illustrate the major trends, including a
large increase in labeling for AMPA receptors at 5 weeks compared
to P10 and a moderate level of NMDA receptors maintained at P10
and at 5 weeks. Panel (g) contains a synapse showing NMDA-R and
no AMPA-R labeling.
a b
c
d
e
f
g
h
nature neuroscience • volume 2 no 1 • january 1999 33
© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
over all excitatory synapses) is initially low and increases during
development for AMPA-Rs, while remaining high and constant
for NMDA-Rs. These findings were largely independent of the
particular AMPA or NMDA-R antibody, indicating that these are
properties of the receptors and not changes in epitopes or subunits during development.
We have also tested the hypothesis that synapses exist with
NMDA-Rs but no AMPA-Rs and that over postnatal development
the frequency of such pure NMDA-R synapses decreases by the
synaptic incorporation of AMPA-Rs. This view is supported by
the finding that at P2 most synapses lack AMPA-R immunoreactivity, whereas most have NMDA-R labeling. This disparity
decreases with development, so that at five weeks a similar fraction lacks AMPA-R and NMDA-R immunoreactivity. We also
modeled the effect of the low detection efficiency of the immunogold technique. Application of this model to the observed distributions of immunoparticles indicated that the fraction of synapses
lacking AMPA-Rs is initially high and progressively drops with
development. This analysis also indicated that most synapses have
NMDA-Rs throughout development. Lastly, we have increased
the sensitivity of detection by modifying the immunolabeling procedure. Again we saw a significant fraction of synapses lacking
AMPA immunolabeling in young animals, whereas at five weeks
most synapses have AMPA immunolabeling.
This study provides a molecular explanation for previous
physiological observations that glutamatergic transmission is initially largely mediated by NMDA-Rs, and over development
AMPA-Rs increase in their participation. Our data suggest that
these properties of transmission can be largely attributable to an
initial synaptic incorporation of NMDA-Rs, with progressive
incorporation of AMPA-Rs during postnatal development. A
similar molecular mechanism, namely the delivery of AMPA-Rs
to synapses that have only NMDA-Rs or have both AMPA and
NMDA-Rs, can explain much of long-term potentiation in this
region of hippocampus, a cellular model of learning and memory2,3,7,8. This provides further support for the notion that LTP
and early postnatal development are mechanistically related18–21.
Methods
ELECTRON MICROSCOPY. The postembedding immunogold method has
been described22,23 and is modified from a previous method24. Briefly,
male Sprague-Dawley rats were perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde plus
0.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer. Two animals were used
per age; additional animals were used in preliminary studies (not shown).
Parasagittal sections (250 µm) of the hippocampus were cryoprotected in
30% glycerol and frozen in liquid propane in a Leica EM CPC. Frozen
sections were immersed in 1.5% uranyl acetate in methanol at –90°C in
a Leica AFS freeze-substitution instrument, infiltrated with Lowicryl HM
20 resin at –45°C, and polymerized with ultraviolet light. Thin sections of
the hippocampus were incubated in 0.1% sodium borohydride plus 50
mM glycine in Tris-buffered saline/0.1% Triton X-100 (TBST), followed
by 10% normal goat serum (NGS) in TBST, primary antibody in 1%
NGS/TBST, immunogold (10 nm; Amersham) in 1% NGS/TBST plus
0.5% polyethylene glycol, and finally staining in uranyl acetate and lead
citrate. For double labeling, the first primary antibody and correspondarticles
Fig. 4. Frequency distribution of AMPA and
NMDA-R immunogold labeling, observed
and fit by the low-detection model.
(a) Open bars show frequency of number of
immunogold particles per synapse detected
at P2, P10 and 5 weeks for GluR1 C-terminus (top), GluR2/3 (middle) and NR1 (bottom). Frequency distributions have been
fitted by least-square regression analysis to a
model with two components: a Poisson fraction (gray bars) and a fraction containing only
zero (black bars; FLR; Methods). N is number
of synapses counted. (b) The robustness of
the model was assessed by Monte Carlo simulations of low-detection sampling from the
experimental immunogold distributions
(Methods). Average values of FLR obtained
from the simulations are plotted as a function of the detection level applied to the
experimental distribution for GluR1 (top),
GluR2/3 (middle) and NR1 (bottom) distributions. Error bars represent standard deviation. Note that the variability in FLR estimation becomes larger as detection becomes lower. This
results from the reduced number of bins in the low-detection distributions. For instance, simulated distributions obtained at a relative detection of 0.1 were typically composed of 90% zeroes.
a b
Immunogold particles per synapse Relative detection
Frequency
Fraction lacking receptors
P2 P10 5 weeks
GluR1 GluR1
GluR2/3
NR1
GluR2/3
NR1
Fig. 5. Frequency distributions of AMPA-R immunogold particles
with high-sensitivity immunolabeling conditions. Filled bars represent P10; open bars represent 5 weeks. Inset, simulations of random
low-detection sampling done as described for Fig. 4. Average values
and standard deviations for FLR are plotted versus detection relative to the experimental distribution.
34 nature neuroscience • volume 2 no 1 • january 1999
Immunogold particles per synapse
Frequency
© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
nature neuroscience • volume 2 no 1 • january 1999 35
ing immunogold-conjugated antibody (5-nm gold) were applied, sections were exposed to paraformaldehyde vapor at 80°C for one hour, and
the second primary and secondary (15-nm gold) antibodies were applied
the following day23–25. For the single-labeled AMPA-R antibody mix
study, primary and secondary antibody incubations were done at 37°C,
and 5 nm gold was used. Immunogold particles were counted in the postsynaptic density and cleft, as described22,23. In each section, all synapses
in a selected portion of the CA1 stratum radiatum were photographed
and included in the study. At all ages, synapses (even immature ones)
used in this study showed the characteristic features of asymmetric
synapses: postsynaptic density, cleft and presynaptic vesicles. Nevertheless, synapses were uncommon at P2. Many appeared immature, with
small, poorly developed postsynaptic densities. Spines typically were
short, and many appeared to be only protrusions from dendrites. In spite
of the immature appearance of some aspects of presynaptic and postsynaptic structures at P2, synapses were identified readily by the basic characteristics typical of all asymmetric synapses, as noted above. At P10,
synapse development was intermediate between P2 and 5 weeks. Controls included absence of primary antibody for single labeling and absence
of the second primary antibody for double labeling; controls always
showed little or no gold labeling.
Most primary antibodies were characterized previously26–30. Primary antibodies used were GluR1-C terminus (4.1 µg/ml), GluR1-N terminus (3.2 µg/ml), GluR2 (4 µg/ml), GluR2/3 (2 µg/ml), NR1 (4 µg/ml)
and NR2A/B (4 µg/ml). The ‘AMPA-R mix’ is a combination of antibodies to GluR1-N terminus (1.6 µg/ml), GluR2 (2 µg/ml), GluR2/3 (2
µg/ml), GluR4 (1.9 µg/ml) and AMPA-R-extracellular loop. To develop
a pan-AMPA-R antibody, the extracellular loop of GluR2 was amplified
by PCR and inserted into a pET vector (Novagen, Madison, WI) to create a C-terminus polyhistidine-tagged fusion protein. The fusion protein was purified and injected into rabbits. Antiserum was affinity purified
and shown to recognize flip and flop variants of GluR1-4 by western blot
analysis of membranes from cells transfected with GluR1–4 cDNAs. All
micrographs used in the figures were processed with Adobe Photoshop
4.0 to optimize brightness and contrast.
LOW-DETECTION ANALYSIS. Because the fraction of receptors detected by
immunogold electron microscopy depends on random factors like thin
sectioning of postsynaptic densities or incomplete epitope exposure, we
have modeled the observed immunograin distributions as a random lowdetection sampling of the true receptor distributions. The true distribution of receptors at synapses (before low-detection sampling) can be
divided into two sets: those synapses truly having receptors, R+, and those
synapses truly without receptors, R–. (This latter population may have
only few receptors, in which case these synapses would likely be electrophysiologically silent.) After simulated low-detection sampling (see
below), we find that the resulting distribution of receptors arising from R+
approaches a Poisson distribution if the coefficient of variation (c.v.) of
R+ is less than ~0.6 or a gamma distribution otherwise (see part a of supplementary figure at http://neurosci.nature.com/web_specials/suppinfo/nn0199_31). The synapses without receptors, R–, remain without
receptors after low-detection sampling. We fitted (nonlinear least-squares
analysis31) the observed distributions to a model distribution made of a
Poisson plus extra zeroes (model has two degrees of freedom) or gamma
plus extra zeroes (model has three degrees of freedom). In most cases,
observed distributions were accurately described by a Poisson plus zeroes
(p > 0.99, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test). In the remainder of cases, a reliable
fit (p > 0.99) was obtained by using a gamma plus zeroes. Nevertheless,
the value for extra zeroes was similar (within 5%) using either distribution. We use the value for extra zeroes as the estimated fraction of synapses lacking receptors (FLR). Confidence limits for the estimated
parameters were determined by Monte Carlo simulations32 (see below).
The accuracy of the method, that is, its ability to find the correct
value for FLR, was evaluated by modeling arbitrary receptor distributions with different fraction of synapses lacking receptors. Low-detection simulations (see below) from these distributions showed that the
estimated value for FLR coincides with the correct fraction of synapses lacking receptors when the original distribution is not very broad
(low c.v.). In this case, the estimation for FLR was fairly independent
from the detection value. On the contrary, the estimated FLR value
tends to be larger than the correct one when the original distribution is
highly dispersed (high c.v.), and this overestimation increases as detection becomes smaller (supplementary figure, part b). An overestimation of FLR can be detected by obtaining experimental data at different
detection levels or by randomly sampling the experimental distribution with different detection values. If the calculated FLR value increases with decreasing detection levels, we can conclude that the fraction
of synapses lacking receptors is being overestimated. Conversely, the
estimated FLR is accurate when it is independent from the detection
level. This test was shown to be valid for receptor distributions with
different average number of receptors per synapse or different fraction
lacking receptors (supplementary figure, part b).
LOW-DETECTION SIMULATIONS AND ESTIMATES OF CONFIDENCE LIMITS. Random low-detection sampling was simulated as follows. A random number between 0 and 1 was assigned to each receptor in a particular synapse.
When the random number was higher than the chosen detection value,
the corresponding receptor was rejected, that is, not detected. Thus, the
lower the detection value, the more likely it is that a receptor will be
rejected. By repeating this process for every synapse in the original distribution, a low-detection distribution is generated with the non-rejected, that is, detected receptors. In the case of a detection rate of one,
simulated distributions were generated by randomly choosing synapses
from the original data without altering their number of receptors. As
many synapses were chosen as were present in the original distribution,
but the random selection allowed some synapses to be chosen several
times, whereas others may not have been selected in one particular simulation. One thousand independent simulations were carried out for
articles
Fig. 6. Amplitude of focally evoked miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents does
not change with development. (a)
Representative samples of miniature synaptic
responses in CA1 hippocampal neurons to
focal application of sucrose from P2 (left), P10
(middle) and 5 weeks (right). Six traces of
500 ms each are shown superimposed. The
increase in mepsc frequency with development was a general finding4 and consistent
with an increase in the number of synapses
containing AMPA-Rs. (b) Amplitude distributions of all responses from P2 (5 cells, 312
events), P10 (5 cells, 656 events) and 5 weeks
(3 cells, 360 events). Neither mean amplitude
nor cumulative distributions (not shown)
were significantly different.
a
b
Miniature amplitude, pA
P2 P10 5 weeks
Frequency
mean = 9.6 pA
N = 312
mean = 9.9 pA
N = 656
mean = 10.1 pA
N = 360
© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com
36 nature neuroscience • volume 2 no 1 • january 1999
each detection level. Then, the resulting distributions were fitted individually to the model to estimate the corresponding value for the fraction of synapses lacking receptors. With these independent values,
probability distributions and confidence limits were generated for the
estimated parameter32.
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY. Rat hippocampal slices were prepared, and whole-cell
recordings were obtained from CA1 neurons under visual guidance with
standard bathing and internal solutions as described7. Bathing medium
contained 1 µM tetrodotoxin. Neuronal somata were held at –60 mV in
voltage-clamp mode. Series resistance was not significantly correlated
with mean mepsc amplitude, nor was it significantly different for the different age groups. A patch pipette containing 500 mM sucrose was positioned ~100 µm from the cell bodies in stratum radiatum, and pulses of
pressure were applied (10 psi, 100 ms, 0.3 Hz).
Note: Further details of methods and a supplementary figure may be
found on the Nature Neuroscience web site at
http://neurosci.nature.com/web_specials/supp_info/nn0199_31
Acknowledgements
We thank A. Allen and N. Dawkins-Pisani for technical support, and J. Lisman
and members of the Malinow and Wenthold laboratories for comments.
RECEIVED 1 SEPTEMBER; ACCEPTED 20 NOVEMBER 1998
1. Hollmann, M. & Heinemann, S. Cloned glutamate receptors. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 17, 31–108 (1994).
2. Liao, D. & Malinow, R. Deficiency in induction but not expression of LTP in
hippocampal slices from young rats. Learn. Mem. 3, 138–149 (1996).
3. Durand, G., Kovalchuk, Y. & Konnerth, A. Long-term potentiation and
functional synapse induction in developing hippocampus. Nature 381, 71–75
(1996).
4. Hsia, A. Y., Malenka, R. C. & Nicoll, R. A. Development of excitatory circuitry
in the hippocampus. J. Neurophysiol. 79, 2013–2024 (1998).
5. Wu, G.-Y., Malinow, R. & Cline, H. T. Maturation of a central glutamatergic
synapse. Science 274, 972–976 (1996).
6. Isaac, J. T., Crair, M. C., Nicoll, R. A. & Malenka, R. C. Silent synapses during
development of thalamocortical inputs. Neuron 18, 269–280 (1997).
7. Liao, D., Hessler, N. A. & Malinow, R. Activation of postsynaptically silent
synapses during pairing-induced LTP in CA1 region of hippocampal slice.
Nature 375, 400–404 (1995).
8. Isaac, J. T., Nicoll, R. A. & Malenka, R. C. Evidence for silent synapses:
implications for the expression of LTP. Neuron 15, 427–434 (1995).
9. Mayer, M. L., Westbrook, G. L. & Guthrie, P. B. Voltage-dependent block by
Mg2+ of NMDA responses in spinal cord neurons. Nature 309, 261–263
(1984).
10. Rusakov, D. A. & Kullmann, D. M. Extrasynaptic glutamate diffusion in the
hippocampus: ultrastructural constraints, uptake, and receptor activation. J.
Neurosci. 18, 3158–3170 (1998).
11. Kullmann, D. M. & Asztely, F. Extrasynaptic glutamate spillover in the
hippocampus: evidence and implications. Trends Neurosci. 21, 8–14 (1998).
12. Dong, H. et al. GRIP: a synaptic PDZ domain-containing protein that
interacts with AMPA receptors. Nature 386, 279–284 (1997).
13. Barria, A., Muller, D., Derkach, V., Griffith, L. C. & Soderling, T. R.
Regulatory phosphorylation of AMPA-type glutamate receptors by CaM-KII
during long-term potentiation. Science 276, 2042–2045 (1997).
14. Kharazia, V. N., Phend, K. D., Rustioni, A. & Weinberg, R. J. EM
colocalization of AMPA and NMDA receptor subunits at synapses in rat
cerebral cortex. Neurosci. Lett. 210, 37–40 (1996).
15. Desmond, N. L. & Weinberg, R. J. Enhanced expression of AMPA receptor
protein at perforated axospinous synapses. Neuroreport 9, 857–860 (1998).
16. Wenthold, R. J., Petralia, R. S., Blahos II, J. & Niedzielski, A. S. Evidence for
multiple AMPA receptor complexes in hippocampal CA1/CA2 neurons. J.
Neurosci. 16, 1982–1989 (1996).
17. Bekkers, J. M., Richerson, G. B. & Stevens, C. F. Origin of variability in
quantal size in cultured hippocampal neurons and hippocampal slices. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87, 5359–5362 (1990).
18. Shatz, C. J. Impulse activity and the patterning of connections during CNS
development. Neuron 5, 745–756 (1990).
19. Fox, K. The critical period for long-term potentiation in primary sensory
cortex. Neuron 15, 485–488 (1995).
20. Katz, L. C. & Shatz, C. J. Synaptic activity and the construction of cortical
circuits. Science 274, 1132–1138 (1996).
21. Constantine-Paton, M. & Cline, H. T. LTP and activity-dependent
synaptogenesis: the more alike they are, the more different they become.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 8, 139–148 (1998).
22. Wang, Y.-X., Wenthold, R. J., Ottersen, O. P. & Petralia, R. S. Endbulb
synapses in the anteroventral cochlear nucleus express a specific subset of
AMPA-type glutamate receptor subunits. J. Neurosci. 18, 1148–1160 (1998).
23. Zhao, H.-M., Wenthold, R. J. & Petralia, R. S. Glutamate receptor targeting to
synaptic populations on Purkinje cells is developmentally regulated. J.
Neurosci. 18, 5517–5528 (1998).
24. Matsubara, A., Laake, J. H., Davanger, S., Usami, S. & Ottersen, O. P.
Organization of AMPA receptor subunits at a glutamate synapse: a
quantitative immunogold analysis of hair cell synapses in the rat organ of
Corti. J. Neurosci. 16, 4457–4467 (1996).
25. Wang, B.-L. & Larsson, L.-I. Simultaneous demonstration of multiple
antigens by indirect immunofluorescence or immunogold staining. Novel
light and electron microscopical double and triple staining method
employing primary antibodies from the same species. Histochemistry 83,
47–56 (1985).
26. Wenthold, R. J., Yokotani, N., Doi, K. & Wada, K. Immunochemical
characterization of the non-NMDA glutamate receptor using subunitspecific antibodies. Evidence for a hetero-oligomeric structure in rat brain. J.
Biol. Chem. 267, 501–507 (1992).
27. Petralia, R. S. & Wenthold, R. J. Light and electron immunocytochemical
localization of AMPA-selective glutamate receptors in the rat brain. J. Comp.
Neurol. 318, 329–354 (1992).
28. Petralia, R. S., Yokotani, N. & Wenthold, R. J. Light and electron microscope
distribution of the NMDA receptor subunit NMDAR1 in the rat nervous
system using a selective anti-peptide antibody. J. Neurosci. 14, 667–696
(1994).
29. Petralia, R. S., Wang, Y.-X. & Wenthold, R. J. The NMDA receptor subunits
NR2A and NR2B show histological and ultrastructural localization patterns
similar to those of NR1. J. Neurosci. 14, 6102–6120 (1994).
30. Petralia, R. S., Wang, Y.-X., Mayat, E. & Wenthold, R. J. Glutamate receptor
subunit 2-selective antibody shows a differential distribution of calciumimpermeable AMPA receptors among populations of neurons. J. Comp.
Neurol. 385, 456–476 (1997).
31. Johnson, M. L. & Faunt, L. M. Parameter estimation by least-squares
methods. Methods Enzymol. 210, 1–37 (1992).
32. Straume, M. & Johnson, M. L. Monte Carlo method for determining
complete confidence probability distributions of estimated model
parameters. Methods Enzymol. 210, 117–129 (1992).
articles