Phase-to-rate transformations encode touch in cortical
neurons of a scanning sensorimotor system
John C Curtis1,2,4 & David Kleinfeld2,3
Sensory perception involves the dual challenge of encoding external stimuli and managing the influence of changes in body
position that alter the sensory field. To examine mechanisms used to integrate sensory signals elicited by both external stimuli
and motor activity, we recorded from rats trained to rhythmically sweep their vibrissa in search of a target. We found a select
population of neurons in primary somatosensory cortex that are transiently excited by the confluence of touch by a single vibrissa
and the phase of vibrissa motion in the whisk cycle; different units have different preferred phases. This conditional response
enables the rodent to estimate object position in a coordinate frame that is normalized to the trajectory of the motor output,
as defined by phase in the whisk cycle, rather than angle of the vibrissa relative to the face. The underlying computation is
consistent with gating by an inhibitory shunt.
The perception of object location relative to the body depends on
tracking sensor position—eyes for seeing or fingers for touching—as
much as on the activation of those sensors by features of an object.
Over a half century ago, von Holst1 emphasized that one cannot hope
to understand sensation without consideration of the effects ‘‘produced on the sensory-receptors by the motor impulses which initiate
a muscular movement.’’ von Holst factored the signals required for
sensation into three components. One is an afferent signal that
originates from environmental influences—for example, light for
the case of looking and pressure for the case of touching—and is
denoted ex-afference. A second component is an afferent signal that
results from activation of sensory receptors by self-motion and is
called reafference. The motor-driven sensory input can involve the
same receptors that encode external stimuli, as in the case of
peripheral reafference, or a separate group of receptors, as in the
case of proprioception. A final sensory component may be provided
by an efference copy of the motor command; this corresponds to the
intended rather than actual motor activation of sensory receptors.
The ex-afferent component can interact with one or both motor
signals (that is, reafference or efference copy) to produce a perceptually stable representation of the identity and location of external
stimuli relative to a changing body configuration.
The coexistence and possible interaction of ex-afference, reafference
and efference copy signals has been demonstrated from peripheral to
thalamocortical levels2
. In gaze control, reafferent signals of actual eye
position and efference copy of the intended position of gaze3 gate the
input to vestibular nuclei as part of the vestibular ocular response4. In
the visual system, neurons in cat thalamus5 and primary visual cortex6
respond to visual stimuli (the ex-afferent signal) and to the stimulation
of extra-ocular muscle proprioceptors (a reafferent signal). Further,
interactions between ex-afference visual signals and a presumed reafference of eye position have been observed at multiple levels of cortical
processing in primates7. Responses to combinations of ex-afference,
reafference and efference copy signals lie at the heart of transformations
to place sensory input in body-centered coordinates. Yet mechanistic
and conceptual understandings of how ex-afference and reafference
interact to generate such transformations are lacking.
Rats sweep their vibrissae through space with stereotypical rhythmic
motions as they locomote and search for objects in their immediate
environment. Multiple features of the rat vibrissa system make it an
ideal nervous system for studying the interaction of ex-afference and
reafference. First, behavioral work has shown that rats can determine
the position of an object relative to that of its head through the use of a
single moving vibrissa8. This implies that the underlying computation
of touch in a head-centered coordinate system depends on the interaction of an ex-afference signal (that is, vibrissa contact) with either a
reafference or an efference copy that reports vibrissa position. A
substrate for such interactions is provided by anatomical connections
among sensory and motor areas, at the levels of brainstem through
cortex9,10, that form nested feedback loops11,12. Efferent signals give rise
to rhythmic motor activity that results in stereotypical whisking
behavior13. This motion in turn generates a robust peripheral reafference that is locked to the phase of the vibrissae in the whisk cycle14 and
strongly modulates the output of neurons in vibrissa primary sensory
(S1) cortex15–17, with different neurons having different preferred
phases15. Recent evidence suggests that reafference and ex-afference
signals are communicated along parallel pathways from the brainstem
to cortex18,19. Thus ex-afferent and reafferent signals associated with
vibrissa-based touch are likely to remain separate until they are allowed
to interact in vibrissa S1 cortex.
Received 24 November 2008; accepted 23 January 2009; published online 8 March 2009; doi:10.1038/nn.2283
1Division of Biological Sciences, 2Computational Neurobiology Graduate Program and 3Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego, California, USA. 4Present address: Systems Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, San Diego, California, USA. Correspondence should be addressed to D.K.
(dk@physics.ucsd.edu).
492 VOLUME 12 [ NUMBER 4 [ APRIL 2009 NATURE NEUROSCIENCE
ARTICLES
© 2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
Here, we test the hypothesis that ex-afference touch signals are
modulated by reafference signals associated with sensor motion to
form a representation of object location relative to the animal’s body
plan. We ask the following questions: first, what is the nature of exafferent vibrissa touch signals encoded by single units in vibrissa S1
cortex? Past results consider only responses that are induced by passive
rather than active vibrissa movement. Second, is touch represented in a
coordinate system that is matched to the region currently scanned,
defined by the phase of the vibrissa in the whisk cycle, or one that spans
the full range of vibrissa position? Past results15–17 imply that the
reafferent signal encodes phase, which suggests but does not establish
that touch is also encoded in terms of phase. Finally, how can known
cortical circuits give rise to the observed interaction of ex-afferent and
reafferent signals?
RESULTS
Rats were trained to palpate a sensor with their vibrissae in either a freeranging (Fig. 1a) or a body-constrained (Fig. 1b) behavioral configuration. In both paradigms, whisking was accompanied by large
movements of the head, so that contact of a vibrissa with the sensor
spanned all possible phases of the whisk cycle (Supplementary Fig. 1
online); there was a small but significant (P o 0.01) excess of touch
events at protraction over retraction. Animals that succeeded in this
task underwent surgery to implant a microwire head stage20 above
vibrissa S1 cortex to record broadband electrical activity. These signals
were subsequently sorted into single units21, as verified by the consistency of spike waveforms across instances and autocorrelation
functions that decay toward zero at equal time
(Fig. 1c). We established the principal
vibrissa22 for each of two to four electrodes
in S1 cortex and trimmed all but these vibrissae; no systematic differences in whisking or
touch were observed that were related to different numbers of intact
vibrissae. Further, microwires were implanted into the mystacial pad to
record the differential electromyogram (rEMG) of the muscles that
drive the vibrissa motion.
The rectified rEMG was used to deduce the phase of the vibrissae,
denoted f(t), during contact events and during periods of time when
rats were coaxed to whisk freely in the air16. These epochs of freewhisking13 allowed the reafferent response to whisking to be assessed
(Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 2 online). Videographic imaging was
used to deduce the phase and angular position, y(t), of the vibrissae
surrounding contact events, and to confirm that only a single vibrissa
touched the sensor (Fig. 1c). The resulting spike, rEMG data,
videographic data and touch sensor signals were sufficient to calculate
the spiking as a function of phase in the whisk cycle during
free whisking as well as spiking as a function of both phase and
absolute angle during epochs of vibrissa contact (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 2).
The instantaneous phase in the whisk cycle is denoted f(t); this can
be expressed as f(t) ¼ [2pfwhiskt – fwhisk]modulo 2p during rhythmic
whisking, where fwhisk is the whisking frequency and fwhisk is the
preferred phase. A preferred phase of fwhisk ¼ 0 corresponds to the
protracted position, fwhisk ¼ ± p is the retracted position, and
negative (positive) angles indicate protraction (retraction). The instantaneous angular position and phase are related by y(t) ¼ ymidpoint(t) +
Dy(t)  cos[f(t)], when the midpoint, ymidpoint(t), and amplitude,
Dy(t), vary only slowly on the timescale of the period of whisking,
that is, 1/fwhisk.
a
c d
b Figure 1 Experimental setups and data
acquisition. (a) Free ranging apparatus. The rat
cranes from a perch to contact a piezoelectric
touch sensor that is held in position by a
pneumatic piston and imaged with a high-speed
camera. Five seconds after the initial contact the
sensor is withdrawn and the rat receives a liquid
food reward. Spike signals from stereotrodes in
the rat’s cortex and EMG electrodes in the
mystacial pad, along with contact, positional and
video data, are logged. (b) Body restrained
apparatus. The animal is wrapped in a sack that
is held in a plastic tube. All other experimental
features as in a, except that food is delivered from
a port close to the animal’s head. (c) Examples
of primary data surrounding contact events,
including vibrissa position data, the rectified
touch signal and accompanying video frames,
the rectified rEMG and lowpass filtered rectified
rEMG, and the neuronal activity from both
channels of the stereotrode. We further show the
spike times from two single units after sorting
of the spike data; the bottom plots show the
respective waveforms and autocorrelations.
(d) The left strip shows the response of unit 1 in c
to touch across multiple trials, together with the
touch signal. The right strip shows the response
during free whisking, together with the concurrent
rEMG. The averages relative to contact and to
the peak of the rEMG signals are shown at the
bottom of the panel.
NATURE NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 12 [ NUMBER 4 [ APRIL 2009 493
ARTICLES
© 2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
Single units respond during free whisking as well as touch
We recorded 152 single units in the vibrissa S1 cortex of nine rats, a
majority of which responded to whisking in free air. No differences
were seen between free-ranging (Fig. 1a) versus body-constrained
(Fig. 1b) paradigms. Cross-correlations between spiking activity and
the rectified rEMG show that individual units tend to spike at specific
phases of the whisk cycle (Fig. 2a–d, left column). The presence of units
whose spike rate remains phasically modulated in time follows from the
narrow distribution of whisking frequencies13 (fwhisk ¼ 8.7 ± 1.3 Hz;
mean ± s.d.). In an extension of past work, we found that the spike rate
during free whisking epochs appears unchanged from that during
periods of negligible mystacial rEMG activity, such as when an animal
walks without whisking (Fig. 2e). Thus whisking tends to reorganize
the timing of spikes rather than add new spikes, which is reminiscent of
the effect of finger taps on the response of neurons in the primary
somatosensory area of monkeys23.
Most single units responded to active touch (Fig. 2a–d, middle
column). Three broad classes of responses emerged based on trialaveraged responses: rapid excitation (Fig. 2a), slow net inhibition
(Fig. 2b) similar to that seen under nonwhisking conditions24 and
slow net excitation (Fig. 2c). The temporal delineation between rapidly
and slowly responding cells was sharp (Supplementary Fig. 3 online),
and all classes of neurons contained both narrow and broad spike
waveforms25 (Supplementary Fig. 4 online). Rapidly excited units
responded to touch with phasic spiking that had a latency to onset of 5
to 9 ms and ranged from 12 to 44 ms in duration. These units had the
greatest maximum spike rate (Fig. 2f) and fired about 2% of their
action potentials in bursts (Supplementary Fig. 5 online). They were
largely confined to the granular and deep infragranular layers (Fig. 2g
and Supplementary Fig. 6 online), which is consistent with data
gathered from anesthetized animals in which whisking was driven by
electrical stimulation of the vibrissa motor nerve18,26. Both categories
of slowly responding neurons encode the behavioral task per se (as well
as touch) in that their spike rates change as the rat cranes and whisks
vigorously as it attempts to touch the sensor (Fig. 2c, middle row).
Neurons that exhibited slow excitation upon touch dominated the
supragranular and infragranular layers, whereas those with slow
inhibitory responses were uniformly distributed among all layers
(Supplementary Fig. 6).
Phase in the whisk cycle gates the rapid touch response
We observed that 20% of the single units were both rapidly excited by
touch and modulated by whisking. These units, designated as RE
touch/whisking neurons, form the locus of our analysis on the confluence of ex-afferent touch and reafferent whisking signals. Our goal
was to test whether the touch responses were modulated by the phase of
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
Figure 2 Free whisking and exemplar touch responses of all single units. (a–d) Spike rates for rapidly excited (a), slowly inhibited (b), slowly excited (c) and
no (d) response. The left column is a histogram of the average spike rate centered on the peaks of rEMG activity, which corresponds to the maximal
protraction. Spike rates were fit with Poisson maximum likelihood estimates of a series of complex exponentials to determine the baseline firing rate and the
dominant whisking frequency, amplitude and phase of each spike response (green line). The phase for the peak response is defined as fwhisk. The middle
column is a histogram of the touch response, smoothed using Bayesian adaptive regression splines (green line). The last column shows the temporal waveform
and autocorrelation function for the unit. The uncertainly in all cases is represented by 95% confidence intervals. (e) The spike rate for all units whose spike
rate was significantly (P o 0.05) modulated by whisking versus the rate in the absence of whisking; in neither case did the vibrissae contact an object. A fit to
the data of Ratewhisking ¼ slope Ratenonwhisking yields slope ¼ 1.05 ± 0.11 (mean ± 2 s.e.m.) for rapidly excited units and slope ¼ 1.03 ± 0.04 for all other
units; neither slope is significantly different from unity (line). (f) Average response to touch over all single units in a given class of both whisking and touchsensitive units. The compendium is the percent of total responses across all single units. (g) The laminar distribution of single units that responded to active
touch, independent of their whisking-related response (Supplementary Fig. 6).
494 VOLUME 12 [ NUMBER 4 [ APRIL 2009 NATURE NEUROSCIENCE
ARTICLES
© 2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
the vibrissa in the whisk cycle at the time of contact. We illustrate the
analysis process in terms of the data for three example units whose
preferred phases span the full range of whisking (Fig. 3a–d). First, we fit
sinusoids to the rectified rEMG signal surrounding each contact event as a means to
model rhythmic whisking and determine the
phase in the whisk cycle at the time of contact
(Fig. 3a). Second, a smooth rate function was
fit to the event-averaged touch response for
each unit (Fig. 3b). Third, individual touch
responses were sorted into one of eight phase
intervals within the whisk cycle. The average
touch response within each phase interval was
fit as a scaled version of the previously derived smooth rate function for
that neuron (Fig. 3c); we note that the shape of the touch response
appeared invariant to amplitude. Finally, the peak amplitude of the
Figure 3 Examples of the interaction between
phase in the whisk cycle, as determined from the
rEMG signal, and the response of rapidly excited
touch-sensitive single units. (a) Histograms of the
spike responses to free whisking in air. The spike
rates were fit with sinusoids (green line).
(b) Histograms of the touch response, averaged
over all events, as a function of time from the
measured contact. The spike rates were fit with
smooth curves (green line). (c) Histograms of the
touch response parsed according to the phase in
the whisk cycle upon contact. The phase interval
is p/4 radians. The red curves correspond to the
interval with the maximum response, and the
black curves correspond to a lower response;
these curves are scaled versions of smoothed trialaveraged touch responses in b. (d) Plots of the
peak values of the touch response from the fits to
each of the eight intervals of the touch responses
in c; dots designate the example fits from c. The
uncertainty represents the 95% confidence
interval. A smooth curve through this data defines
the phase of maximal touch response, denoted
ftouch. (e) Curves derived from sinusoid fits of the
pre- and post-touch response and smooth curves
of the touch response are shown for the data of
unit 3 and plotted on a logarithmic scale. The
responses to touch events for whisking phases
near f ¼ –(5/8)p are minimal and are close to the trough of the modulation of spiking by whisking. The touch response increases in amplitude for contact
events close to the peak of the modulation of spiking by whisking, that is, near f ¼ (3/8)p.
Retraction Protraction Retraction Protraction Retraction Protraction
a bc d
e
a
c
b
d
Figure 4 Summary of the phase sensitivity and
spike rate modulation of rapidly excited touchsensitive single units. (a) Scatter plot of the
preferred phase for free whisking versus the
preferred phase for touch. Shown are mean values
plus 95% confidence intervals for the estimates
of either phase. The data are consistent with
ftouch ¼ fwhisk (P o 0.001). (b) Touch responses
as a function of phase in the whisk cycle (gray),
where each curve is normalized to its peak value
and centered with respect to fwhisk, the preferred
phase for the unit while the rat whisked in air. The
solid black curve is the population average, and
the dashed curve is the minimum relative spike
activity. (c) The maximum spike rates during
active touch (Max in inset) versus the average
spike rates while whisking in air (Mean in inset).
(d) Comparison of the modulation depths
(equation (1)) of the spike rates for touch versus
free whisking.
NATURE NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 12 [ NUMBER 4 [ APRIL 2009 495
ARTICLES
© 2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
eight fitted functions defined a tuning curve of touch response versus
phase in the whisk cycle (Fig. 3d).
We observed that the touch response for each unit is strongly
modulated by vibrissa position, such that the response is maximal at
or near the preferred phase during free whisking (compare panels in
Fig. 3a with those in Fig. 3d); this is highlighted when the spike
response is visualized on a logarithmic scale (Fig. 3e). There is no
systematic change in the amplitude of whisking as a function of
where contact occurs in the whisk cycle (Supplementary Fig. 7
online). The maximum spike rate for the response to touch is about
tenfold higher, on average, than the approximately 9-Hz average
spike rate during whisking. The strong modulation of the touch
response is suggestive of a nonlinear interaction between reafference
and ex-afference.
In general, RE touch/whisking units showed responses to touch that
were tuned to the phase of the whisk cycle (28 of 35 units) (all responses
in Supplementary Figs. 8 and 9 online). A summary shows that the
phase at the maximal touch response for each unit, denoted as ftouch
(Fig. 3d), is statistically equal to the unit’s preferred phase during free
whisking; that is, ftouch Efwhisk (Fig. 4a). All values of preferred phase
are represented, with a distribution that is biased toward retraction
(Fig. 4a, side bars). All tuning curves are relatively broad, with an
average half width at half maximum of 0.32p ± 0.05p radians (mean ±
s.d.) (Fig. 4b, thick line); this coincides with the p/3 radian width for
cosine-shaped tuning curves.
We next determined whether the spike rate during free whisking
is predictive of the peak rate upon touch. In contrast to nai¨ve
expectations, the maximum rate upon touch was nearly independent of the average spike rate during free whisking (P ¼ 0.05)
(Fig. 4c). A related analysis considers the modulation depth of
the spike rates (Fig. 4d, inset)
Modulation depth
 Maximum spike rate  Minimum spike rate
Mean spike rate
ð1Þ
The modulation depth of the tuning curve for the touch response was,
on average, four times greater than that for the free whisking response.
Neither the spike rate nor the modulation depth showed a systematic
dependence on preferred phase in the whisk cycle (Supplementary
Fig. 10 online). Critically, the modulation depth for touch at different
phases in the whisk cycle was statistically independent (P ¼ 0.8) of the
modulation of the rate during free whisking (Fig. 4d).
Vibrissa angle is a poor modulator of the touch response
We revisited the possibility that the spike response upon contact may be
a function of angular position, which depends on the midpoint angle
and amplitude of the whisk, in addition to phase in the whisk cycle
(Fig. 4a,b). Position data were derived from videographic images
during contact events (Fig. 1c). As a control, we compared the phase
of the vibrissae in the whisk cycle at the time of contact derived from
the videographic data (Fig. 5a,b and Supplementary Fig. 8) with the
phases derived from the rEMG data. The two sets of data closely
match (Supplementary Fig. 11 online). We next considered modulation in the spike rate upon contact as a function of position (Fig. 5c,d)
and observed a relatively small and insignificant modulation.
The modulation of the touch response by phase in the whisk cycle
was relatively high: an average of 1.2 across the 2p radian range of phase
(Fig. 5e). In contrast, the modulation of the touch response by position
Figure 5 Comparison of the phase dependence
versus angular position dependence of the touch
response, derived from videographic analysis of
vibrissa position, for rapidly excited touchsensitive single units. (a) Histograms of the touch
response parsed according to the phase in the
whisk cycle upon contact; phase interval is
p/4 radians. The red curves correspond to the
interval with the maximum response, and the
black curves correspond to a lower response.
(b) Plots of the peak values of the touch response
from the fits to each of the eight intervals of the
touch responses in a; dots designate the example
fits from a. The uncertainty represents the 95%
confidence interval. A smooth curve through this
data defines the phase of maximal touch
response. (c) Histograms of the touch response
parsed according to the angular position of the
vibrissa upon contact. The angle relative to the
midline of the animal’s head was determined from
videographic analysis of vibrissa position
(Fig. 1c). The red curves correspond to the
interval with the maximum response, and the
black curves correspond to a lower response.
(d) Plots of the peak values of the touch response
from the fits to each of the eight intervals of the
touch responses in c; dots designate the example
fits from c. (e) Comparison of the modulation
depths (equation (1)) of the spike rates for touch
versus phase in the whisk cycle. We show the data
with phase determined from videography (green)
and phase determined from the rEMG (red;
Fig. 4d). All points are significantly (P o 0.05) modulated. (f) Comparison of the modulation depths (equation (1)) of the spike rates for touch versus angular
position in the whisk cycle. Only 4 of 28 points are significantly (P o 0.05) modulated. (g) The angular amplitude (orange arcs) and midpoint (blue arc) for
whisking for each of the RE touch-sensitive single units. The bars denote the 95% range of variation of parameters across all trials.
a
e fg
b c d
496 VOLUME 12 [ NUMBER 4 [ APRIL 2009 NATURE NEUROSCIENCE
ARTICLES
© 2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
averaged only 0.4 across the full range of whisking angles and was
statistically significant (P o 0.05) in only 14% of the cases (Fig. 5f). As
an average over all RE touch/whisking units, the amplitude of whisking
varied by 121 between trials, or 70% of the average value of Dy, whereas
the midpoint of the region of whisking varied by 61 between trials, or
35% of the average amplitude (Fig. 5g). In summary, RE touch/
whisking units encode touch in terms of phase, which is normalized
to the particular amplitude and midpoint, as opposed to angular
position, on a given trial.
We consider the possibility that the broad tuning curve for the touch
response as a function of phase in the whisk cycle (Fig. 4b) results from
a preferred phase, ftouch, that is modulated by the amplitude or the
frequency of whisking. Under these contingencies, the observed broad
curve could be the sum of multiple narrow curves, each with a slightly
different value of ftouch. For the example of unit three (Figs. 3 and 5),
we observe no difference in either the preferred phase fwhisk or the
width of the tuning curve when the dataset is equally divided based on
trials with large-amplitude versus small-amplitude whisks (Fig. 6a–c).
A similar invariance occurs when the dataset is equally divided based on
trials with lower versus higher whisking frequencies (Fig. 6a,d,e), for
which time delay could in principle lead to a frequency-dependent
phase. Signal-to-noise constraints allowed us to perform this analysis
for only 6 of the 28 RE touch/whisking units, yet all showed statistically
significant invariance (P o 0.02) with regard to preferred phase and
broad tuning (Supplementary Fig. 12 online).
DISCUSSION
Active sensing by the rat vibrissa system involves two sensory signals: a
reafferent signal of motor activity that encodes the phase of the vibrissa
in the whisk cycle and an ex-afferent signal that encodes touch (Fig. 2).
We have shown that these two signals are merged in a highly nonlinear
manner (Figs. 3 and 4) in vibrissa S1 cortex and that contact is coded
with respect to vibrissa phase rather than angular position (Fig. 5). The
coding is robust and invariant with respect to changes in whisking
parameters (Fig. 6).
The representation of contact in a normalized, relative coordinate
system that is dynamically generated by the motor trajectory is somewhat similar to the coding of visual stimuli in dynamic, objectedcentered coordinates, as occurs in parietal and premotor cortices in
primates7,27. This is in contrast to the static, retinotopic coordinates
instantiated by primary visual areas. Coding in phase coordinates
implies that there is a common pathway for the reafferent and exafferent signals, or that these signals follow separate pathways with
similar adaptation. To the extent that separate pathways are used, as has
been suggested18, we propose a neuronal circuit that computes the
location of objects within a sensory field (Fig. 7a).
Origin of the reafferent signal
A reafference signal that encodes the phase in the whisking cycle is
present at the level of primary sensory neurons in the trigeminal
ganglion14,28. In animals that whisk (for example, mice, rats and
gerbils), vibrissa follicles are innervated with both deep and superficial
nerve endings29. Both innervations are distinct and highly structured,
and they terminate in different regions of the trigeminal complex.
Notably, animals that do not whisk (for example, cats, guinea pigs and
rabbits) either completely lack superficial follicle receptors or the
innervation is sparse and largely unstructured. This led to the hypothesis that superficial nerve innervation serves as proprioceptive reafference for vibrissa motion29. The mechanism by which compression of
the follicle during movement is transformed into a phase code is
unknown, but it could involve adaptation to the range of whisking30.
A second issue involves the possibility that the reafference and exafference form separate thalamocortical tracks19. There are four pathways—one that involves posterior medial thalamus and three that
involve subdivisions of ventral posterior medial thalamus—that originate from different populations of secondary sensory cells in the
trigeminal nuclei31. Recent reports provide evidence (albeit controversial) that the posterior medial thalamic pathway encodes predominantly vibrissa motion18,32, whereas at least one of the ventral posterior
medial thalamic pathways encodes predominantly touch18.
Model for the interaction of contact and whisking signals
A biophysical model for gating of the active touch response must
account for four phenomena. First, the ex-afferent touch signals and
the reafferent free whisking responses are enhanced at the same phase in
the whisk cycle (Fig. 4a). Second, the spike rate amplitudes and
modulation depths of the spike rates for touch and free whisking
responses are independent (Fig. 4c,d). Third, the modulation of the
touch response is much greater than the relatively small modulation of
a
b
c
d
e
Figure 6 Example of the phase dependence as a function of whisking
parameters for a rapidly excited touch-sensitive single unit. (a) The response
for unit 3 (Figs. 3 and 5) averaged over all trials, for which fwhisk ¼ 0.45 p.
(b,c) The touch response for unit 3 parsed according to the angular position
of the vibrissa upon contact and separated into low-amplitude (41 to 121, b)
versus large-amplitude (131 to 251, c) whisks, with preferred phases
fwhisk ¼ 0.46p and fwhisk ¼ 0.38p, respectively. The black curve is the
combined response from a. (d,e) The touch response for unit 3 parsed
according to the frequency of whisking and separated into low-frequency
(5 to 9Hz, d) versus high-frequency (10 to 13 Hz, e) whisks, with preferred
phases fwhisk ¼ 0.37p and fwhisk ¼ 0.40p, respectively.
NATURE NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 12 [ NUMBER 4 [ APRIL 2009 497
ARTICLES
© 2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
the spike rate by free whisking (Figs. 2d and 4c,d). Fourth, the whisking
reafference essentially does not change the background spike rate
(Fig. 2e).
Summation of the ex-afferent and reafferent inputs, followed by a
spike-generating mechanism whose firing rate is a steeply increasing
function of input current, is a potential mechanism for the observed
phenomena. However, a substantial increase in the slope of spike rate
versus input current is unprecedented for cortical neurons33. A related
scheme makes use of the summation of signals near threshold33.
However, both whisking and touch events ride on a substantial background rate for all of our units (Figs. 2–4). Multiplication of the exafferent touch signal with the reafferent whisking signal is a potential
nonlinearity that can strongly modulate the touch response by the
phase in the whisk cycle. One expectation for this scheme that is
implicit from studies on the multiplication of signals by neurons34–37 is
that the amplitude of the touch response should track that of the
whisking response. However, in contrast to this expectation, the
modulation depth for touch at different phases in the whisk cycle
was independent of the modulation of the rate during free
whisking (Fig. 4d).
We propose that shunting inhibition of a putative touch pathway by
a whisking pathway provides a likely circuit to gate the touch response
by the phase in the whisk cycle. Shunting inhibition38 also provides a
means for one input to modulate the synaptic gain of a second input.
A minimal model consists of a neuron with three compartments, each
with a leak battery with resistance R and potential EL, arranged so that
(i) an active zone has a bias battery, with conductance GB and potential
EB, and generates spikes; (ii) a soma receives shunting—that is,
GABAA-mediated synaptic input with a battery with conductance GS
and inhibitory potential ES, where ES B EL; and (iii) a dendritic
compartment receives excitatory synaptic input with a battery with
conductance GE and excitatory potential EE
(Fig. 7a). The sequential arrangement of the
compartments, taken for simplicity to be one
electrotonic length apart, allows the inhibitory
whisking input to both modulate the background spike rate and gate an
excitatory touch input (Figs. 2a and 3). Putative inhibitory neurons
that are strongly modulated by whisking but not touch in close
proximity to rapidly excited touch cells is consistent with our laminar
analysis of different classes of single units (Fig. 2g and Supplementary
Fig. 6).
Insight into the mechanism of shunting inhibition can be gleaned
from a linear analysis of the circuit because the spike rate tracks the
membrane potential in the presence of high background activity39.
For simplicity, we ignore the bias current and assume that the
maximal synaptic conductances are large (Fig. 7a). Contact at the
preferred phase in the whisk cycle, that is, f ¼ fwhisk so that RGS ¼
0, leads to a membrane potential of Vm B (4EL + EE)/5 at the active
zone, which exceeds the rest level Vm B EL. In contrast, when
contact occurs at f ¼ fwhisk ± p, so that RGS c 1, the excitatory
touch input is shunted by the inhibitory whisking input, and the
membrane potential falls to Vm B (EL + ES)/2 + EE/(2RGS), which is
close to the rest level. The independence of touch and whisking is
seen by estimating their modulation depths (equation (1)), with Vm
as a surrogate for spike rates
Modulation depthj
WhiskingC1
4
EL  ES
EL







 !ELES
0 ð2Þ
which approaches zero when the shunt and leak potentials are
equal, and
Modulation depthj
TouchC 2
5
3ðEL  ESÞ + EE + j2ESj
j3EL + ESj
  !ELES
1
5 ð3Þ
which approaches a constant in the same limit. Thus the modulation
depth for touch can be both independent of that for whisking and
larger, which is consistent with our observations (Fig. 4d).
a
c
def
b
-
Figure 7 Shunting-inhibition model for the phase
sensitivity of active touch. (a) Circuit diagram for
the three-compartment neuron that captures the
essence of shunting inhibition. The whisking
signal is ‘inverted’ by a local inhibitory neuron and
acts as a shunt between distal excitatory touch
input and the soma. (b) Example results from
a numerical simulation of the circuit equation
for our model; note the extra spike for ‘touch’
near the preferred phase of fwhisk ¼ 0.
(c) Example result for one model neuron. The
same analysis tools were used as with the data
for RE/touch units (Fig. 4). The left column is a
histogram of the average spike rate centered on
the peaks of EMG activity, corresponding to
protraction. The next two columns are histograms
of the touch response, shown as a composite and
by phase in the whisk cycle. The right column
shows the tuning curve. (d) The trial-averaged
maximal spike rates during active touch versus
the average spike rates while whisking in air;
0.05 oRGB o 0.8. (e) The maximum spike rate
upon contact versus the mean rate; 0 oRGSO
o20 (equation (10)). (f) The modulation depth of
the spike rate as a function of phase in the whisk
cycle versus the modulation with phase in the
whisk cycle; 0 oRGSO o20.
498 VOLUME 12 [ NUMBER 4 [ APRIL 2009 NATURE NEUROSCIENCE
ARTICLES
© 2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
Numerical analysis of the model (Fig. 7a) with a Hindmarsh-Rose–
type mechanism for spike generation and parameters appropriate for
cortical neurons40 clearly shows that the response to touch is enhanced
at the preferred phase in the whisk cycle (Fig. 7b,c). Simulations with
different bias conductances show that whisking has only a marginal
effect on the spike rate (Fig. 7d). Simulations with different shunt
conductances show that the amplitude of the touch response is
independent of the amplitude of the free whisking spike rate
(Fig. 7e), and that modulation in the spike rate by changes in vibrissa
position is both much greater than and independent of the modulation
during free whisking (Fig. 7f). The proposed circuit can, in principle,
be confirmed or refuted by recording the intracellular potential from
layer 4 spiny stellate or star pyramidal cells in rats that are trained to
whisk17,41. A combination of ion blockers and voltage clamping should
reveal whether the whisking response is mediated by inhibitory input.
Spike rates and angular resolution
The average ongoing rate of spiking hovers around 9 Hz (Fig. 2e), and
the average modulation of the spike rate by whisking per se is ± 2 spikes
per second. This corresponds to B0.4 spikes per whisk, on top of a
fluctuating background of B1 spike per whisk. We estimate that the
output from B200 neurons must thus be summed to achieve a
resolution of p/3 radians, as set by the tuning curve (Fig. 4b), to
specify the phase in the whisk cycle on a single trial basis. Decoding
schemes that make use of the absence of a response at nonpreferred
phases may lower this estimate. On the other hand, the consensus view
of the spike rate of neurons in vibrissa S1 cortex is evolving, with
evidence from intracellular studies that the ongoing rates for many
neurons may lie closer to 1Hz than 10Hz42,43. A lower average rate
would increase the variability and increase the estimate.
With regard to contact-induced spikes, active touch leads to an
average, integrated response of 2 spikes per contact within a window of
B20 ms (Fig. 3b); this further coincides with the time spent in each
resolvable phase interval of p/3 radians (Fig. 4b). The additional spikes
generated by active touch substantially exceed the B0.4 spikes generated by whisking alone and should be sensed with high fidelity.
Resolution at a scale much finer than p/3 radians may be achieved
by averaging the responses from multiple neurons. Finally, for the
average whisking range of ±171 (Fig. 5g), the corresponding angular
resolution is B51, which approximates the typical threshold for
bilateral perceptual acuity with a vibrissa44.
Relation to directional tuning
Directional tuning is a common metric used to quantify neuronal
response of vibrissa units in the anesthetized animal45. It measures the
bias in the activity of neurons as a vibrissa is deflected in different
directions. Notably, directional tuning forms a fine-scale map within a
cortical column46.
Directional tuning may be derived from an asymmetry in the phase
preference of a neuron. With phase tuning for contact defined as T(f –
ftouch) (Figs. 3d, 4b and 6), the directional tuning along the anteriorposterior axis is
DðftouchÞ ¼ 2
R 0
p dffTðf  ftouchÞgodd
R 0
p dffTðf  ftouchÞgeven
where odd and even refer to the odd and even parts of the function. The
directional tuning is double-valued over the whisk cycle, so that the
phase preference of a neuron cannot be uniquely determined from its
directional preference. Nonetheless, to the extent that active and passive
touch lead to neuronal responses with similar directional preference,
neurons with different preferred phases in the whisk cycle are expected
to conform to the map for directional tuning.
METHODS
Training and behavior. We successfully trained nine female Long-Evans rats
(Charles River), 270 to 300 g initial weight, to whisk against a piezoelectric
sensor (DT1–028K; Measurement Specialties Inc.) in return for a liquid food
reward (0.2 ml per trial; LD–100; PMI Feeds). We used two behavioral
paradigms. In the ‘free ranging’ paradigm (Fig. 1a), we trained unconstrained
animals to perch on the edge of a platform and crane their necks to gain access
to the sensor. Each trial was initiated when the rat first contacted the sensor. We
collected video images at a frame rate of B100 frames per second while the rat
palpated the sensor to confirm that the longest vibrissa touched the sensor.
After an approximately 3-s period of palpation, the trial was terminated by
removal of the sensor and concomitant pumping of the liquid reward to a
nearby well on the platform. The sensor remained retracted for 5s, then was
restored to its previous position so that a new trial could begin. In the ‘body
constrained’ paradigm (Fig. 1b), we placed the animals in a sack and held them
in a tube within proximity of a sensor. A trial began when an animal craned and
initially touched the sensor and, as above, was terminated after a 3-s period of
touch events.
Successful learning of either of the above behaviors took about two weeks.
Once training was completed, a small chamber that contained an array of 2 to 4
stereotrodes was fit over the vibrissa area of parietal cortex and secured to the
skull with screws and dental acrylic20. We individually advanced the stereotrodes through the dura into cortex with a vacuum insertion technique that
prevented damage to the upper layers20. We threaded fine wires into the left and
right mystacial pads to record the EMG13. The care and experimental
manipulation of our animals were in strict accord with guidelines from the
US National Institutes of Health and have been reviewed and approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of California,
San Diego.
After several days of post-operative recovery, we briefly anesthetized the
animals and individually stimulated each contralateral vibrissa with a brief air
puff 47 in order to determine the principal vibrissa response for each stereotrode. The designation of the principal vibrissa was based on the amplitude and
latency of the stimulus-locked spikes48. Once we determined the principal
vibrissae across the full complement of stereotrodes, we trimmed all other
vibrissae at B1 mm from the surface of the skin. The rats were returned to
their behavioral setup and invariably performed the task with the single, longest
vibrissa. We then acquired spiking data with the electrode that had this vibrissa
as its principal vibrissa; the electrode was lowered at the start of each recording
session by 80 mm, or until single unit spikes were detected. Once this electrode
had been lowered through the full depth of cortex, we trimmed the longest
vibrissa and proceeded to take data from the next longest vibrissa, and so forth.
Estimation of electrode depth. We exploited the stereotypic form of the radial
current source density to identify the lamina of each recording. After all
electrodes were lowered through the cortex and data collection was completed,
the rat was anesthetized with 5% (w/v) halothane. All electrodes were fully
retracted, then lowered in increments of 80 mm while air puffs were delivered at
1.3 puffs per second to passively stimulate all of the vibrissae. We recorded the
local field potential at each depth as an average over 100 air puffs16. The second
spatial derivative was then calculated across all of the averaged local field
potential responses to produce an estimate of the one-dimensional current
source density profile for each electrode. Current sinks corresponded to the
afferent inputs in layers 4 and 6A; these calibration data allowed us to specify
the lamella and depth of every record (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Fig. 6).
Data acquisition. Continuous time series from the cortical and EMG microwires were band-pass filtered from 0.35Hz (1 pole) to 10kHz (6 poles), and the
piezoelectric sensor was band-pass filtered from 4 kHz (2 poles) to 8 kHz
(2 poles). We sampled all data at 32 kHz and stored blocks of approximately 3 s
in duration that incorporated each epoch of touch on computer disk, together
with the time-locked video images. We obtained additional spike-train records,
10 s in length, as animals were coaxed to whisk in air without contact by
placing their home cage just out of reach16. We digitally high-pass filtered the
NATURE NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 12 [ NUMBER 4 [ APRIL 2009 499
ARTICLES
© 2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
broadband cortical and EMG signals at 300 Hz (4 poles). Pairs of EMG signals
that spanned the mystacial pad were subtracted to form the rEMG13.
We collected high-speed videography (ES310 charge coupled device camera;
Kodak, Inc.) acquired at 100 frames per second during trials where rats
contacted the touch sensor with their vibrissae. Synchronization between video
and electrophysiological data acquisition was accomplished through a hardware
trigger on the Real-Time System Integration Bus (National Instruments). We
calculated the angular position of the principal vibrissa on a frame-by-frame
basis as the angle between one straight line that followed the midline of the
snout and another straight line that followed the first 6 to 10 mm of the vibrissa
shaft (Fig. 1c). The lines were drawn manually, for each frame, with the aid of a
Matlab (The Mathworks)-based graphical user interface.
Data analysis. An offline non-Gaussian cluster analysis algorithm21 was used to
isolate spikes from an apparent common source in each cortical signal. We
characterized modulation of the spike rate of single units during epochs of
rhythmic whisking in air, which occurred before and after contact trials, by
cross-correlating rEMG peak times with spike times. This method allowed us
to normalize the correlation in terms of spike rate. We first band-pass filtered
the rectified rEMG from 3 to 22 Hz and set an appropriate threshold for the
signal as a means to isolate the interval that surrounded the peak of the
waveform, then calculated the center of mass in these intervals to obtain a point
process that represents the peaks of the rEMG. We then shifted this time series
by 20 ms to account for the measured time delay between the onset of muscle
activity, as measured by the rEMG, and movement of the vibrissae13. The
resultant cross-correlation corresponds to the rEMG-triggered average spiking
rate (Fig. 2a–d, gray histograms in left column, and Fig. 4a). The sinusoidal
nature of the cross-correlation was characterized by Poisson-distributed maximum likelihood estimates (MLE) of the mean spike counts49 for a series of
complex exponential functions that spanned the frequency range of 5 to 20 Hz,
plus a constant term (function glmfit in Matlab with the log-link function).
The frequency of the modulation was defined as the estimate with the highest
likelihood among all of the complex exponential estimates in the series. We
calculated the phase and amplitude of each response from the real and
imaginary parts of the estimate. Finally, we normalized the cross-correlations
in terms of spike rates by multiplying the spike counts in each bin by the width
of the bin (2 ms) and dividing by the number of rEMG peaks in the average
(Fig. 2a–d, gray histograms in left column, and Fig. 3a). We used sampling
distributions of maximum likelihood estimators to construct 95% confidence
intervals of the mean spike rate and parameter estimates.
We estimated touch responses from contact-triggered averages, either across
all trials (Fig. 2a–d, gray histograms in middle column, and Fig. 3b) or first
parsed according to the phase of whisking at the time of contact (Fig. 3b, gray
histograms). Smoothed values for all estimates made use of the Poissondistributed Bayesian adaptive regression splines nonparametric smoothing
algorithm50 (http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/Bkass/bars).
We determined the phases of touch events within the whisk cycle by fitting a
series of complex exponentials to the band-pass filtered rEMG or to splineinterpolated videographic traces, centered in a 200-ms window that surrounded
the time of vibrissa touch. The procedure was as described above for spike
events, except that we now used a Gaussian- rather than Poisson-distributed
MLE, as the rEMG data are a continuous function rather than a point process.
We quantified goodness of fit by calculating the ratio of the amplitude of the fit
relative to the r.m.s. residual of the fit; we discarded contact events with ratios
less than two.
To assess the touch responses as a function of phase in the whisk cycle, cycles
in which touch occurred were first divided into eight intervals of p/4 radians.
We then binned touch responses according to the interval in which the
touch events occurred to produce a set of eight histograms for each single
unit (Figs. 3c and 5a,e). To ensure that our results were statistically reliable
across the full range of phase intervals, we excluded sessions with less than eight
touch events in any phase interval. We then modeled touch responses for each
whisk cycle phase interval with a Poisson-distributed MLE as scaled versions of
the overall touch response, computed as described above (Fig. 3c–e, red and
black curves). We used the peak amplitudes for each of the best fits to construct
the tuning curve for the single unit (Figs. 3d and 5b). We calculated confidence
intervals (95%) for mean spike rates from sampling distributions of maximum
likelihood estimators. A similar procedure was followed to assess the touch
responses as a function of angle in the whisk cycle, for which videographic data
were used to determine vibrissa position relative to the midline (Fig. 1c).
Model. The circuit model (Fig. 7a) consists of three compartments with equal
membrane capacitances, C, and resistances, R, that are joined by a resistance of
R so that the compartments are one electrotonic length apart in the absence of
synaptic input. We define EL, EB, ES and EE as the reversal potentials for the
leak, excitatory bias, inhibitory synaptic shunt and excitatory synaptic currents,
respectively, GL as the fixed leak conductance, GB as the conductance of a slowly
varying bias current, and GS and GE as the conductances for the vibrissa-driven
inhibitory shunt and touch-driven excitation, respectively. For constant values
of the conductances, the steady state subthreshold voltage of the active zone,
denoted Vm, is given by:
Vm ¼
ð8+2RGS+4RGE+RGSRGEÞEL+RGBð5+2RGS+3RGE+RGSRGEÞEB+RGSð2+RGEÞES+RGEEE
8+5RGB+2ð2+RGBÞRGS+ð5+3RGBÞRGE+ð2+RGBÞRGSRGE
ð4Þ
The full dynamics are found by solving five equations, which include a thirdorder Hindmarsh-Rose system to generate spikes in a cortical cell with
adaptation, and additive band-limited Gaussian noise to approximate the
variability in synaptic arrival time. We have
dVm
dt ¼ 1
tm
fða+bVm+cV2
mÞðENa  VmÞ+
RGRðEK  VmÞU+RGAðEK  VmÞW+
RGBðEB  VmÞ+ðVs  VmÞ+Inoiseg
ð5Þ
dU
dt ¼ 1
tU
fU+eVm+f +gðEKA  VmÞ
2
g ð6Þ
dW
dt ¼ 1
tW
fW+hðE1  VmÞðE2  VmÞg ð7Þ
dVS
dt ¼ 1
tm
fðES  VSÞRGS+ðEL  VSÞRGL+ðVm  VSÞ+ðVE  VSÞg ð8Þ
dVE
dt ¼ 1
tm
f g ð Þ EE  VE RGE+ð Þ EL  VE RGL+ð Þ VS  VE ð9Þ
where the leak term RGL(EL –Vm) in the dynamics for Vm is subsumed in the
active currents, and tm ¼ 1 ms, tU ¼ 1 ms, tW ¼ 99 ms, ENa ¼ 48 mV, EK ¼ –95
mV, EKA ¼ –38 mV, ES ¼ EL ¼ –74 mV, EB ¼ EE ¼ +10 mV, E1 ¼ –75.4 mV,
E2 ¼ –69 mV, RGR ¼ 26, RGA ¼ 13, RGB ¼ 0.2 (ranges 0.05 to 0.8), RGL ¼ 1,
a ¼ 17.8, b ¼ 0.476 mV–1, c ¼ 3.38  103 mV–2, e ¼ 1.3  102, f ¼ 0.8,
g ¼ 3.3  104 and h ¼ 1.1  103 in our simulations. The noise current has an
r.m.s. value of 2.0 mV; the shunting inhibitory conductance was of the form
RGS¼ RGSO
2 f1+ cosð2pfwhiskt  fwhiskÞg ð10Þ
where RGSO ¼ 10 (ranges 0 to 20) and fwhisk ¼ 9Hz; and the excitatory touch
conductance was of the form
RGE ¼ RGEOe
ðttEOÞ
2
=2t2
EO ð11Þ
where RGEO ¼ 40, tEO ¼ 20 ms and tEO is a random variable with a mean of
0.25 s that marks touch events.
Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Neuroscience website.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank S.B. Mehta for assistance with spike sorting, E.N. Brown and
R.E. Kass for instruction on spike-train analysis, G.A. White for electronics
support, E. Ahissar, W. Denk, M. Deschenes, M.E. Diamond, A.L. Fairhall,
D.N. Hill and T.J. Sejnowski for relevant discussions, D. Matthews for reading
of the manuscript, and the US National Institutes of Health (NS051177), the US
National Science Foundation (IGERT) and the US/Israel Binational Foundation
(2003222) for financial support.
500 VOLUME 12 [ NUMBER 4 [ APRIL 2009 NATURE NEUROSCIENCE
ARTICLES
© 2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published online at http://www.nature.com/natureneuroscience/
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
1. von Holst, E. Relations between the central nervous system and the peripheral organ.
Br. J. Anim. Behav. 2, 89–94 (1954).
2. Cullen, K.E. Sensory signals during active versus passive movement. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol. 14, 698–706 (2004).
3. Sommer, M.A. & Wurtz, R.H. Influence of the thalamus on spatial visual processing in
frontal cortex. Nature 444, 374–377 (2006).
4. Roy, J.E. & Cullen, K.E. Dissociating self-generated from passively applied head motion:
neural mechanisms in the vestibular nuclei. J. Neurosci. 24, 2102–2111 (2004).
5. Lal, R. & Friedlander, M.J. Effect of passive eye position changes on retinogeniculate
transmission in the cat. J. Neurophysiol. 63, 502–522 (1990).
6. Ashton, J.A., Boddy, A. & Donaldson, I.M. Directional selectivity in the responses of units
in cat primary visual cortex to passive eye movement. Neuroscience 13, 653–662
(1984).
7. Andersen, R.A., Snyder, L.H., Li, C.S. & Stricanne, B. Coordinate transformations in the
representation of spatial information. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 3, 171–176 (1993).
8. Mehta, S.B., Whitmer, D., Figueroa, R., Williams, B.A. & Kleinfeld, D. Active spatial
perception in the vibrissa scanning sensorimotor system. PLoS Biol. 5, e15 (2007).
9. Deschenes, M., Timofeeva, E., Lavalle´e, P. & Dufresne, E. The vibrissal system as a
model of thalamic operations. Prog. Brain Res. 149, 31–40 (2005).
10. Fox, K. Barrel Cortex 14–48. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2008).
11. Kleinfeld, D., Berg, R.W. & O’Connor, S.M. Anatomical loops and their electrical
dynamics in relation to whisking by rat. Somatosens. Mot. Res. 16, 69–88 (1999).
12. Ahissar, E. & Kleinfeld, D. Closed loop neuronal computations: focus on vibrissa
somatosensation in rat. Cereb. Cortex 13, 53–61 (2003).
13. Berg, R.W. & Kleinfeld, D. Rhythmic whisking by rat: retraction as well as protraction of
the vibrissae is under active muscular control. J. Neurophysiol. 89, 104–117 (2003).
14. Szwed, M., Bagdasarian, K. & Ahissar, E. Coding of vibrissal active touch. Neuron 40,
621–630 (2003).
15. Fee, M.S., Mitra, P.P. & Kleinfeld, D. Central versus peripheral determinates of patterned
spike activity in rat vibrissa cortex during whisking. J. Neurophysiol. 78, 1144–1149
(1997).
16. Ganguly, K. & Kleinfeld, D. Goal-directed whisking behavior increases phase-locking
between vibrissa movement and electrical activity in primary sensory cortex in rat. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 101, 12348–12353 (2004).
17. Crochet, S. & Petersen, C.C.H. Correlating membrane potential with behaviour using
whole-cell recordings from barrel cortex of awake mice. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 608–609
(2006).
18. Yu, C., Derdikman, D., Haidarliu, S. & Ahissar, E. Parallel thalamic pathways for
whisking and touch signals in the rat. PLoS Biol. 4, e124 (2006).
19. Pierret, T., Lavallee, P. & Deschenes, M. Parallel streams for the relay of vibrissal
information through thalamic barreloids. J. Neurosci. 20, 7455–7462 (2000).
20. Venkatachalam, S., Fee, M.S. & Kleinfeld, D. Ultra-miniature headstage with 6-channel
drive and vacuum-assisted micro-wire implantation for chronic recording from neocortex. J. Neurosci. Methods 90, 37–46 (1999).
21. Fee, M.S., Mitra, P.P. & Kleinfeld, D. Automatic sorting of multiple unit neuronal signals
in the presence of anisotropic and non-Gaussian variability. J. Neurosci. Methods 69,
175–188 (1996).
22. Simons, D.J. Response properties of vibrissal units in rat S1 somatosensory neocortex.
J. Neurophysiol. 41, 798–820 (1978).
23. Mountcastle, V.B., Talbot, W.H., Sakata, H. & Hyvarinen, J. Cortical neuronal mechanisms in flutter-vibration studied in unanesthetized monkeys, neuronal periodicity and
frequency discrimination. J. Neurophysiol. 32, 452–484 (1968).
24. Krupa, D.J., Wiest, M.C., Shuler, M.G., Laubach, M. & Nicolelis, M.A. Layer-specific
somatosensory cortical activation during active tactile discrimination. Science 304,
1989–1992 (2004).
25. Bartho, P. et al. Identification of neocortical principal cells and interneurons by
extracellular features. J. Neurophysiol. 92, 600–608 (2004).
26. Derdikman, D. et al. Layer-specific touch-dependent facilitation and depression
in the somatosensory cortex during active whisking. J. Neurosci. 26, 9538–9547
(2006).
27. Olson, C.R. Brain representation of object-centered space in monkeys and humans.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 26, 331–354 (2003).
28. Leiser, S.C. & Moxon, K.A. Responses of trigeminal ganglion neurons during natural
whisking behaviors in the awake rat. Neuron 53, 117–133 (2007).
29. Arvidsson, J. & Rice, F.L. Central projections of primary sensory neurons innervating
different parts of the vibrissae follicles and intervibrissal skin on the mystacial pad of the
rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 309, 1–16 (1991).
30. Maravall, M., Petersen, R.S., Fairhall, A.L., Arabzadeh, E. & Diamond, M.E. Shifts in
coding properties and maintenance of information transmission during adaptation in
barrel cortex. PLoS Biol. 5, e19 (2007).
31. Urbain, N. & Descheˆnes, M. A new thalamic pathway of vibrissal information modulated
by the motor cortex. J. Neurosci. 27, 12407–12412 (2007).
32. Masri, R., Bezdudnaya, T., Trageser, J.C. & Keller, A. Encoding of stimulus frequency
and sensor motion in the posterior medial thalamic nucleus. J. Neurophysiol. 100,
681–689 (2008).
33. McCormick, D.A., Connors, B.W., Lighthall, J.W. & Prince, D.A. Comparative electrophysiology of pyramidal and sparsely spiny stellate neurons of the neocortex.
J. Neurophysiol. 54, 782–806 (1985).
34. Ahrens, K.F., Levine, H., Suhl, H. & Kleinfeld, D. Spectral mixing of rhythmic neuronal
signals in sensory cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 99, 15176–15181 (2002).
35. Pena, J.L. & Konishi, M. Robustness of multiplicative processes in auditory spatial
tuning. J. Neurosci. 24, 8907–8910 (2004).
36. Andersen, R.A. & Mountcastle, V.B. The influence of angle of gaze upon the excitability
of the light sensitive neurons of the posterior parietal cortex. J. Neurosci. 3, 532–548
(1983).
37. Salinas, E. & Abbott, L.F. A model of multiplicative neural responses in parietal cortex.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 93, 11956–11961 (1996).
38. Koch, C., Poggio, T. & Torre, V. Nonlinear interactions in a dendritic tree: localization,
timing, and role in information processing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 80, 2799–2802
(1983).
39. Richardson, M.J., Brunel, N. & Hakim, V. From subthreshold to firing-rate resonance.
J. Neurophysiol. 89, 2538–2554 (2003).
40. Rudolph, M., Pospischil, M., Timofeev, I. & Destexhe, A. Inhibition determines
membrane potential dynamics and controls action potential generation in awake and
sleeping cat cortex. J. Neurosci. 16, 5280–5290 (2007).
41. Lee, A.K., Manns, I.D., Sakmann, B. & Brecht, M. Whole-cell recordings in freely moving
rats. Neuron 51, 399–407 (2006).
42. de Kock, C.P., Bruno, R.M., Spors, H. & Sakmann, B. Layer- and cell-type-specific
suprathreshold stimulus representation in rat primary somatosensory cortex. J. Physiol.
(Lond.) 581, 139–154 (2007).
43. Manns, I.D., Sakmann, B. & Brecht, M. Sub- and suprathreshold receptive field
properties of pyramidal neurones in layers 5A and 5B of rat somatosensory barrel cortex.
J. Physiol. (Lond.) 556, 601–622 (2004).
44. Knutsen, P.M., Pietr, M. & Ahissar, E. Haptic object localization in the vibrissal system:
behavior and performance. J. Neurosci. 26, 8451–8464 (2006).
45. Bruno, R.M., Khatri, V., Land, P.W. & Simons, D.J. Thalamocortical angular tuning
domains within individual barrels of rat somatosensory cortex. J. Neurosci. 19,
7603–7616 (2003).
46. Andermann, M.L. & Moore, C.I. A somatotopic map of vibrissa motion direction within a
barrel column. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 543–551 (2006).
47. Kleinfeld, D., Sachdev, R.N.S., Merchant, L.M., Jarvis, M.R. & Ebner, F.F. Adaptive
filtering of vibrissa input in motor cortex of rat. Neuron 34, 1021–1034 (2002).
48. Armstrong-James, M., Fox, K. & Das-Gupta, A. Flow of excitability within barrel cortex on
striking a single vibrissa. J. Neurophysiol. 68, 1345–1358 (1992).
49. Brown, E.N., Frank, L.M., Tang, D., Quirk, M.C. & Wilson, M.A. A statistical paradigm for
neural spike train decoding applied to position prediction from ensemble firing patterns
of rat hippocampal place cells. J. Neurosci. 18, 7411–7425 (1998).
50. DiMatteo, I., Genovese, C.R. & Kass, R.E. Bayesian curve-fitting with free-knot splines.
Biometrika 88, 1055–1071 (2001).
NATURE NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 12 [ NUMBER 4 [ APRIL 2009 501
ARTICLES
© 2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.