Learning and remembering real-world events after
medial temporal lobe damage
Adam J. O. Dedea,b, Jennifer C. Frascinoa,c, John T. Wixtedb
, and Larry R. Squirea,b,c,d,1
a
Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA 92161; b
Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093; c
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093; and d
Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego,
La Jolla, CA 92093
Contributed by Larry R. Squire, October 13, 2016 (sent for review May 10, 2016; reviewed by Howard Eichenbaum and Joseph R. Manns)
The hippocampus is important for autobiographical memory, but
its role is unclear. In the study, patients with hippocampal damage
and controls were taken on a 25-min walk on the University of
California, San Diego, campus during which 11 planned events
occurred. Memory was tested directly after the walk. In addition, a
second group of controls took the same walk and were tested
after 1 mo. Patients with hippocampal damage remembered fewer
details than controls tested directly after the walk but remembered a similar number of details as controls tested after 1 mo.
Notably, the details that were reported by patients had the
characteristics of episodic recollection and included references to
particular places and events. Patients exhibited no special difficulty remembering spatial details in comparison with nonspatial
details. Last, whereas both control groups tended to recall the
events of the walk in chronological order, the order in which
patients recalled the events was unrelated to the order in which
they occurred. The findings illuminate the role of the hippocampus
in autobiographical memory and in the spatial and nonspatial
aspects of episodic recollection.
hippocampus | prospective memory | autobiographical memory
Autobiographical memory represents the experiences of our
lives and provides our sense of self. We can reexperience
events from the past, and we can imagine events in the future.
Without this faculty, our conscious life would be a series of
unconnected moments.
The severely amnesic patient K.C. cannot remember a single
personal event from his life and cannot describe what he did
yesterday or what he might do tomorrow (1). K.C.’s amnesia was
caused by a closed-head injury, which damaged the hippocampus
and adjacent cortex, as well as regions of the frontal and parietal
lobes (2). Although the extent of K.C.’s lesions makes it difficult to
relate his impairment to anatomy, other work has studied autobiographical memory in patients with more circumscribed damage.
A number of studies have identified the hippocampus as an
important structure for autobiographical memory (3–5), but its
role remains unclear. Some findings emphasize its function in
forming new memories about both events and facts (episodic and
semantic memory) (6). Other studies suggest that the hippocampus is particularly important for the episodic content of autobiographical memory (e.g., time, place, and perceptual information)
and that, as a result, patients with hippocampal damage must rely
on semantic memory alone (7). Still other work suggests that the
hippocampus is especially important for spatial cognition and that
impaired autobiographical memory after hippocampal damage is
due to a difficulty in constructing spatially coherent scenes (8).
Here, we describe a different approach to the study of autobiographical memory and hippocampal function. Patients with
hippocampal damage and healthy volunteers were taken individually on a 25-min walk on the University of California, San
Diego, campus during which 11 planned events occurred (Fig. 1).
Directly after the walk, participants were asked for 6-min, narrative descriptions of what they could remember. Next, they
constructed 1-min narratives in response to prompts about each of
the 11 events. Last, they were given 40 two-alternative, forcedchoice questions about particular details of the walk. In this way,
we assessed the accuracy and quality of memory for real-world
events. Specifically, we evaluated whether and to what extent
participants could recollect episodic content. We also evaluated
the quantity of spatial and nonspatial content and the temporal
organization of the narratives. To determine whether impairments
exhibited by the patients reflect a qualitatively distinct deficit or a
normal feature of weak memory, we also tested a second group of
volunteers who took the same walk but were tested only after an
interval of 1 mo.
Results
Six-Minute Narratives About the Walk. The patients with hippocampal
lesions (H) recalled fewer accurate episodic details about the walk
than the control-1 (CON-1) group [t (10) = 3.9, P < 0.01] and about
the same number of details overall as the control-2 (CON-2) group
tested after 1 mo [t(9) < 1.0, P > 0.2] (Table 1). Fig. 2 shows that,
except for details about time (which were rare in all groups), the H
patients recalled fewer details than the CON-1 group in each category (event, space, and perception) [ts (10) > 2.3, Ps < 0.05], and
they recalled about the same number of details in each category as
the CON-2 group (Ps > 0.1). The single patient with large medial
temporal lobe (MTL) lesions performed more poorly than the patients with hippocampal lesions [Table 1; t(3) = 6.6, P < 0.05]. Note
that the hippocampal patients and the MTL patient had no more
difficulty reporting spatial details about the walk than other kinds of
details (Fig. 2A). Thus, the hippocampal patients scored 1.6, 1.5,
and 1.3 SDs below the CON-1 mean for details in each category
(event, space, and perception).
The patients (H and MTL) also recalled more inaccurate
details than CON-1 and fewer unverifiable details (Table 1), but
these differences did not reach significance (P < 0.08 for inaccurate
Significance
We explored the role of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) in
remembering recent events. Patients with MTL damage and
healthy controls were taken on a walk during which 11 planned events occurred. Patients remembered fewer details about
the events than controls. Nevertheless, the details made reference to particular places and events from the walk. In addition, patients were similarly impaired across different kinds of
content (spatial and nonspatial). Last, the patients were particularly impaired at remembering the temporal order in which
the events occurred. The findings illuminate the role of the MTL
in memory for real-world events and in the spatial and nonspatial aspects of recollection.
Author contributions: A.J.O.D., J.C.F., J.T.W., and L.R.S. designed research; A.J.O.D. and J.C.F.
performed research; A.J.O.D. analyzed data; and A.J.O.D. and L.R.S. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: H.E., Center for Memory and Brain, Boston University; and J.R.M., Emory
University.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
1
To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: lsquire@ucsd.edu.
13480–13485 | PNAS | November 22, 2016 | vol. 113 | no. 47 www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1617025113
details; P > 0.2 for unverifiable details). It was also the case that
patients repeated themselves more during narrative construction
than did CON-1 [t (10) = 2.4, P < 0.05] (Fig. 2B).
To assess memory for the temporal order in which the events
had occurred, we plotted the order in which the 11 events of the
walk were described. Fig. 3A provides this information for the H
and MTL patients (combined) and for CON-1. The CON-1
group described events approximately in the order in which they
had occurred (r = 0.95, P < 0.05). By contrast, the order in which
patients described events was unrelated to the order in which
they had occurred (r = −0.47, P > 0.2). Fig. 3B shows corresponding data for CON-2 in comparison with the data for CON-1.
Group CON-2, like CON-1, described events in the order they
had occurred (r = 0.91, P < 0.05).
One-Minute Narratives About Each of the 11 Events. Fig. 4 shows the
number of accurate details that were recalled during 1 min in response to prompts about each event of the walk. Patients with
hippocampal lesions retrieved significantly fewer details than CON-1
about every event (Ps < 0.05), except event 11 (the drink). The
events that were most memorable for CON-1 were also the most
memorable events for the patients (Fig. 5) (r = 0.81, P < 0.05).
Unlike in the 6-min narratives, the hippocampal patients retrieved marginally fewer accurate details overall than CON-2
(3.9 vs. 5.4 details per event, P = 0.06). This finding appeared to
depend on differences in how well the two groups remembered
the more salient events that appear to the right in Fig. 4. To
confirm this observation, events were divided into two groups:
the five events best remembered by CON-1 and the five events
least remembered. Whereas the scores of the hippocampal patients matched the scores of the CON-2 group for the least remembered events, the patients remembered the salient events
less well than the CON-2 group [interaction of group by salience:
F(1,9) = 9.4, P < 0.05].
As with the 6-min narratives, we evaluated performance in each
content category averaged across all events (event, space, and
perception). (Time details were rare and were not counted; < 0.1
detail per event in each group). The H group recalled fewer event
and perception details than CON-1 [ts (10) > 3.0, Ps < 0.05] and
marginally fewer space details; P < 0.1. The CON-1 group produced an average of 2.9, 1.4, and 4.4 accurate details per event in
the event, space, and perception categories, respectively. For the
H group, the corresponding values were 1.4, 0.6, and 1.9 details,
and for CON-2 the values were 1.6, 1.4, and 2.4 details. The H
group scored 2.7, 1.2, and 1.3 SDs below the CON-1 mean in the
event, space, and perception categories, respectively.
Hippocampal patients produced more inaccurate details than
CON-1 [1.6 vs. 0.5 details per event; t(10) = 3.4, P < 0.05] and
about the same number of inaccurate details as CON-2 (1.6 vs. 1.1
details per event; P > 0.1). Participants reported few unverifiable
details during the 1-min narratives (range of means across groups =
0.6–1.5 details per event; no between-group differences, Ps > 0.1).
We also asked whether the patients had difficulty connecting
remembered details to the appropriate events. That is, did patients mix details between events more frequently than controls?
Accordingly, for the 1-min narratives we counted how often
participants reported details about events other than the event
being asked about. The hippocampal patients did this only rarely,
numerically less often than the CON-1 group (0.2 times per
event vs. 0.3 times per event).
Performance of the patient with large MTL lesions was variable.
Whereas he produced fewer details per event overall than CON-1
(4.4 vs. 8.8), he nevertheless did well describing three of the events
(cup, shoe, and statue). However, he often appeared to remember
only a fragment about an event and then generated a narrative
consisting of plausible guesses and far-fetched comments (in reference to the statue: “It wasn’t a covered wagon”). In addition, his
narratives included more than twice as many inaccurate details as
the narratives of any other group (3.3 per event), he repeated
himself frequently (Fig. 2B), and he frequently incorporated remarks about events other than the event he was asked about (four
times more often than any other group).
Two-Alternative, Forced-Choice Questions About the Walk. Fig. 6
shows the results for the two-alternative, forced-choice test.
Overall, patients with hippocampal lesions performed more
Fig. 1. Map of 11 events that occurred during a 25-min guided walk. 1:
discard a cup. 2: find change in a vending machine. 3: view portraits of
department chairs. 4: point out coffee cart. 5: find book on the second floor
of the library. 6: receive bike lock from student. 7: lock up bike. 8: view
statue. 9: buy banana in cafe. 10: stop to tie shoes. 11: drink from water
fountain. Sidewalks are light gray. Buildings are dark gray. Arrows indicate
the path taken during the walk.
Table 1. Total details
Group Accurate Inaccurate Unverifiable
CON-1 56 (5.3) 4 (1.1) 10 (4.5)
CON-2 32 (5.8) 4 (1.4) 7 (3.6)
H 26 (2.7) 10 (6.2) 5 (2.3)
MTL 18 8 5
Mean number of accurate, inaccurate, and unverifiable details produced
by each group during a 6-min narrative description of the walk. SEs are in
parentheses. CON-1, controls tested directly after the walk. CON-2, controls
tested 1 mo after the walk. H, patients with hippocampal lesions. MTL, a
patient with large medial temporal lobe lesions.
Fig. 2. Number of accurate details produced during a 6-min narrative description
of events that occurred during a 25-min walk. (A) Details were assigned to one of
four categories according to their content. (B) The number of details that were
repeated during the narrative. CON-1, controls tested directly after the walk.
CON-2, controls tested 1 mo after the walk. H, patients with hippocampal lesions.
MTL, a patient with large medial temporal lobe lesions. Error bars show SEM.
Dede et al. PNAS | November 22, 2016 | vol. 113 | no. 47 | 13481
NEUROSCIENCE PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
poorly than CON-1 [t(10) = 2.4, P < 0.05] and performed similarly to CON-2 (P > 0.2). The hippocampal patients performed
poorly in all content categories. In the case of questions about
time, the average score of the patients was good, but they did not
score above chance levels (due to high variability). Their scores
were 2.1, 1.4, and 2.5 SDs below the CON-1 mean for questions
about events, space, and perception, respectively. Thus, although
the hippocampal patients obtained a low score on questions
about space, relative to CON-1 they performed no worse on
questions about space than on other types of questions. It is also
notable that the patient with large MTL lesions performed
poorly overall, but did well on questions about space.
Discussion
Patients with hippocampal damage remembered fewer details
than controls about 11 events that occurred during a guided walk
on the university campus. This impairment was evident in 6-min
narratives that participants constructed about the walk, directly
after returning to the laboratory (Fig. 2). Patients also recalled
fewer details than controls in prompted 1-min narratives about
each of the 11 events (Fig. 4), and they performed poorly on 40
two-alternative, forced-choice questions about specific details
Fig. 3. The data points show when, on average, the events from the walk
were described during the 6-min narratives. The two control groups
tended to describe events in the order that they occurred. The order in
which the patients described events was unrelated to the order in which
the events occurred. Lines represent significant fits to the data. (A) The
patients described only 9 of the 11 events, and no patient described
events 10 and 11. Black squares: CON-1, controls tested directly after the
walk. Open triangles: H, patients with hippocampal lesions plus MTL, a
patient with large medial temporal lobe lesions. (B) CON-1 (black squares)
together with controls tested 1 mo after the walk (CON-2, open circles).
The CON-2 group described only 10 of the 11 events, and no CON-2 described event 1.
Fig. 4. Number of accurate details produced in 1-min narratives when
participants were asked about each event separately in response to a
prompt. The data are arranged according to how well the CON-1 group
remembered each event. CON-1, controls tested directly after the walk.
CON-2, controls tested 1 mo after the walk. H, patients with hippocampal
lesions. MTL, a patient with large medial temporal lobe lesions. Error bars
show SEM.
Fig. 5. Details recalled during 1-min narratives about each event in response to a prompt (also see Fig. 4). The events best remembered by CON-1
were also the events best remembered by the H and MTL patients. The
numbers identify each event (Fig. 1). The scatter plot shows the mean
number of accurate details per event produced by the patients as a function
of the mean number of details produced by CON-1. For example, CON-1
recalled 7.1 details about event 4 (coffee cart) and 10.4 details about event 5
(library). The patients recalled 1.8 and 6.2 details about these same two
events. CON-1, controls tested directly after the walk. H, patients with hippocampal lesions. MTL, a patient with large medial temporal lobe lesions.
13482 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1617025113 Dede et al.
from the walk (Fig. 6). In many respects, performance of the
patients resembled the performance of a group (CON-2) that
was tested 1 mo after the walk. Thus, in their 6-min narratives,
patients recalled about the same number of total details as the
CON-2 group (Table 1), and they recalled a similar number of
details in each content category (event, space, perception, and
time) (Fig. 2). However, in one respect, patient performance
differed sharply from the performance of either the CON-1 or
CON-2 groups. Whereas both control groups tended to recall the
events of the walk in the order that they occurred, the order in
which patients recalled the events was unrelated to the order in
which the events occurred (Fig. 3).
Despite their memory impairment, the patients did remember a
significant number of event, space, and perception details in both
the 6-min (Fig. 2) and 1-min narratives. These details had the
characteristics of episodic recollections and included references to
particular places and events. For example, G.W. remembered that
the bicycle “had a light on the front.” L.J. remembered that the
books in the library had been “further down on the shelf, and it
seems like they were white.” In addition, the events that were most
memorable for the controls were also most memorable for the
patients (Fig. 5), suggesting that patients and controls experienced
the salience of the events similarly.
The behavior of our patients was distinct from that observed
with the densely amnesic patient K.C. (1) and others like him,
who cannot remember any personal events (patient D.R.B. in 9,
patient R.F.R. in 10, and patient G.T. in 11). If damage to the
hippocampus were the cause of such a severe condition, then our
patients’ narratives should have been devoid of episodic content,
lacking specificity about the events of the walk. Their narratives,
to the extent they could remember, should have amounted to a
collection of factual statements related to what was seen on the
walk. However, the narratives produced by our patients contained vivid episodic content. Accordingly, our results are at
odds with the idea that the hippocampus is specifically necessary
for the episodic content of recollection (7). The difference between our patients and more severely impaired patients (e.g., K.C.)
likely depends on differences in the locus and extent of their
brain damage. Indeed, patient K.C. and all of the patients cited
above have damage that extends beyond the MTL to involve
other regions, especially in frontal and lateral temporal cortex
(also see 2, 12).
The question arises whether the capacity for episodic recall
reflects partially preserved hippocampal function in patients with
a reduction in hippocampal volume averaging only 45%. This
possibility seems unlikely for two reasons. First, even patient
G.P., who has virtually no detectable hippocampus, was capable
of some episodic recollection. Second, for two different patients,
neurohistology revealed complete loss of hippocampal neurons
despite only partial reduction in hippocampal volume (13). Thus,
partial hippocampal volume loss in memory-impaired patients
can reflect complete hippocampal dysfunction.
The impairment exhibited by the patients was evident to a
similar degree in three of the four content categories: event,
space, and perception (Fig. 2). Notably, patients exhibited no
special difficulty in the production of spatial content, not in the
6-min narratives and not in the 1-min narratives. Indeed, every
patient provided some accurate and specific spatial details. For
example, K.E., when describing the student with the bike lock
(event 6), accurately remembered: “he was walking west, and we
were going east.” G.W. accurately reported that there were
“muffins on the counter next to the bananas” (event 9). Even
G.P., with large MTL lesions, accurately reported that the statue
had been “8 to 10 feet high...water was coming out of the top.” In
addition, on the 40-item test, the patients had no more difficulty,
in comparison with CON-1, with the questions that asked about
space than with questions about other features of the events
(Fig. 6). Taken together, our results provide little support for the
idea that the hippocampus has a special role in constructing spatial
scenes or in recollecting spatial details from memory. We also
inspected the spatial details produced by the patients in light of
the distinction between allocentric (viewpoint-independent) information and egocentric (viewpoint-dependent) information.
Although we found many details difficult to classify, both kinds of
details were reported (for allocentric, see examples above; for
egocentric, G.W. remembered: “I was...up ahead of her”).
The patients produced few intrusions from events other than
the one being asked about during 1-min narratives. This observation suggests that the patients were able to organize the details
from the walk into distinct coherent events. By contrast, they
differed markedly from controls in that they did not (in the 6-min
narratives) describe events in the same sequence in which they
had occurred (Fig. 3A). Even controls tested after 1 mo still
Fig. 6. Performance on a test of 40 two-alternative, forced-choice questions
about the events from the walk. There were four types of questions, querying different types of information. CON-1, controls tested directly after the
walk. CON-2, controls tested 1 mo after the walk. H, patients with hippocampal lesions. MTL, a patient with large medial temporal lobe lesions. Error
bars show SEM. Horizontal line represents chance performance.
Table 2. Characteristics of memory-impaired patients
Patient Age, y Education, y WAIS-III IQ
WMS-R
Attention Verbal Visual General Delay
D.A. 31 12 95 104 90 91 90 56
K.E. 73 13.5 108 114 64 84 72 55
L.J. 77 12 101 105 83 60 69 <50
G.W. 55 12 108 105 67 86 70 <50
G.P. 68 16 98 102 79 62 66 50
The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS-III) and the Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised (WMS-R) yield mean
scores of 100 in the normal population with a SD of 15. The WMS-R does not provide numerical scores for
individuals who score below 50. IQ score for D.A. is from the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-IV.
Dede et al. PNAS | November 22, 2016 | vol. 113 | no. 47 | 13483
NEUROSCIENCE PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
recalled events in approximately chronological order (Fig. 3B).
Thus, difficulty with temporal order information was not a simple consequence of weak memory.
We suggest that the inability of the patients to remember the
temporal sequence of the walk reflected their inability to bridge
temporal gaps between discrete events. The same difficulty might
explain why patients did poorly at remembering events 5, 6, and
9, which were salient but also extended in time. Specifically, the
gaps between events would have challenged working memory
capacity (14). For each event, working memory was engaged
anew, overwriting any representation in working memory of the
previous event and regardless of the temporal separation between the two events. Accordingly, it would have been difficult to
link separate events, except by relying on long-term memory.
The patients with hippocampal damage would have been disadvantaged because they could not have used long-term memory
to learn about the order of events as they proceeded along the
walk. Similar findings have been reported for rats with hippocampal lesions in a sequence-learning task (15).
Note that this finding is not evidence for a selective impairment
in memory for temporal information. Rather, we suggest that
patients would have been especially impaired on any test that
assessed “global” information about the relationship between
events (temporal, spatial, or perceptual relationships). In contrast,
for tests that assess “local” information about individual events
(and most of our tests did), the information could initially have
been acquired within working memory. The information would
then be available for transfer to long-term memory to the extent
that long-term memory can be established after hippocampal
damage. Importantly, as indicated in Figs. 2, 4, and 6, patients with
hippocampal damage retain some ability to learn about events,
locations, and other material.
In summary, patients with damage to the MTL learned and
remembered fewer details about real-world events than controls
when testing occurred directly after the events occurred. In many
respects, the patients performed similarly to controls tested after a
delay of 1 mo (Figs. 2 and 4). Despite their impairment, patients
recalled many accurate and specific episodic details about events
of the walk. They also remembered details from all content categories (Fig. 2), and there was no evidence of a special difficulty
reporting spatial content about the events. By contrast, patients
were strikingly deficient at remembering the temporal sequence in
which events occurred during the walk (Fig. 3A). The latter result
suggests that the hippocampus is particularly important for
bridging gaps between events and discovering relationships between separate events (temporal, spatial, or perceptual).
Materials and Methods
Participants. Five memory-impaired patients participated (Table 2), four with
bilateral medial temporal lobe lesions limited to the hippocampus (the CA
fields, dentate gyrus, and subicular complex) and one with larger medial
temporal lobe lesions. Patients G.W. and D.A. became amnesic in 2001 and
2011, respectively, following drug overdose and associated respiratory failure. Patient K.E. became amnesic in 2004 after an episode of ischemia associated with kidney failure and toxic shock syndrome. Patient L.J. (the only
female) became amnesic in 1988 during a 6-mo period with no known
precipitating event. Her memory impairment has been stable since that
time. Patients K.E., L.J., G.W., and D.A. have an average bilateral reduction in
hippocampal volume of 49%, 46%, 48%, and 35%, respectively. On the basis
of findings from two patients (L.M. and W.H.) with similar bilateral volume loss
in the hippocampus for whom detailed postmortem neurohistological information was obtained (13), the degree of volume loss in these four patients
may reflect nearly complete loss of hippocampal neurons. The volume of the
parahippocampal gyrus (including temporopolar, perirhinal, entorhinal, and
parahippocampal cortices) is reduced by 11%, ‒17%, 10%, and ‒5% for K.E., L.J.,
G.W., and D.A., respectively. These values are based on published guidelines for
identifying the boundaries of the parahippocampal gyrus (16, 17). The negative
values indicate instances where the volume was larger for a patient than
for controls.
Patient G.P. has severe memory impairment resulting from viral encephalitis in 1987. His memory impairment is so severe that, during repeated
testing over many weeks, he did not recognize that he had been tested
before (18). G.P. has an average bilateral reduction in hippocampal volume
of 96%. The volume of the parahippocampal gyrus is reduced by 94%. Eight
coronal magnetic resonance images from each patient, together with detailed description of the lesions, are presented elsewhere (19).
Two groups of healthy volunteers also participated. One group (CON-1)
was tested directly after the walk (n = 8; 1 female; mean age = 60.8 y; mean
education = 13.8 y). The other group (CON-2) was tested 1 mo after the
walk (n = 7; 3 females; mean age = 64.1; mean education = 14.8 y). All
procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of California, San Diego, and participants gave written informed
consent before participation.
Procedure. Each participant was taken for a 25-min walk on the campus of the
University of California, San Diego. Before the walk, participants were told that
their memory would be tested afterward for everything that occurred during
the walk. However, they would not need to remember any part of conversations. A fixed order of 11 events occurred during the walks (Fig. 1). The
experimenter was the “actor” for each event (she discarded the cup, found the
book, etc.). The sixth event of the walk required a confederate, who provided
a bike lock and asked that the experimenter lock his bike. The walks were
scheduled at either 10:30 AM or 1:30 PM (not during class changes or lunch
time) to standardize the background environment as much as possible.
Upon returning to the laboratory, patients and controls in the no-delay
condition were tested for their memory of the walk. The procedure was identical
for controls tested 1 mo later. Participants were first given up to 6 min to describe
in as much detail as possible all that they could remember about the walk. The
experimenter provided support during narrative construction by probing for
detail (20, 21). Probes ranged from general (e.g., “Can you tell me any more
details about what happened on the walk?”) to specific (e.g., “How close to the
lock did you get?”; “Where was the water?”). The experimenter did not introduce information that had not been already provided by the participant.
Next, the experimenter provided a prompt for each of the 11 events of the
walk (e.g., “What happened at the vending machine?”). In response to each
prompt, participants were given up to 1 min to describe the event in as much
detail as possible. The instructions emphasized that participants could repeat
details they had already reported in the 6-min narrative.
Last, participants were asked 40 two-alternative, forced-choice questions
about the 11 events of the walk. The questions followed the order in which
the events had occurred. Before asking questions about a particular event,
the event in question was first identified (e.g., The next few questions will be
about the statue). Seven questions asked about the event itself (e.g., Did we
find a quarter or a dime?). Thirteen questions asked for perceptual information (e.g., Were the doors to the building wooden or glass?). Thirteen
questions asked for spatial information (e.g., What kind of vending machine
was on the right: snack or drink?). Seven questions asked for temporal information (e.g., Did it take less than 30 s or more than 3 min to walk from the
bike to the fountain?). All responses were recorded.
Narrative Scoring. Narratives were first partitioned into details as described
previously (5, 21–24). Each detail was then scored as reflecting episodic
memory, semantic memory, repetition, or remembered thoughts. Episodic details described aspects of specific events. Semantic details described facts that contextualized events. Participants produced few
semantic details, perhaps because little context is needed when one describes recent events to someone who also experienced them. Mean semantic details (< 6.4 per group per narrative) were not considered further
(e.g., “What’s the point of butterfly nets, because how often do you run
into butterflies?”). Repetitions were details that repeated information
from earlier in the narrative. Thoughts described introspective commentary (e.g., “I liked that place”) and were not analyzed further.
Next, following methods described in other studies (22–24), each episodic detail was categorized according to its content: event, space, time, or
perception. Event details described persons or actions. Spatial details described places or spatial relationships between objects or persons. Time
details described temporal information about an event (e.g., “It was real
quick”). Perceptual details described objects, colors, weather, or other
sensory information.
We then assessed the accuracy of each detail. Details were scored as
“accurate” if they could be verified as having happened on the walk (e.g.,
“You found a quarter in the machine”). Details were scored as “inaccurate”
if they did not happen on the walk [e.g., “We stopped at a Pepsi machine”
(it was a snack machine)]. Details were scored as “unverifiable” if it was not
13484 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1617025113 Dede et al.
possible to determine their accuracy. The unverifiable details were usually
unrelated to any of the 11 scheduled events and involved objects, actions, or
pieces of conversation (e.g., “A girl walking on the path had red shoes”).
A.D. partitioned the 6-min narratives into details and assigned them to
content categories. A second person blind to group membership scored a
randomly selected 32% of the data (two participants from each of the three
groups, six participants total). Across participants and content ratings, the
correlation between scores was 0.92, and Cronbach’s α was 0.96. A.D. scored
the 1-min narratives.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Ryan Ward and Christine Smith for
assistance. This work was supported by the Medical Research Service of
the Department of Veterans Affairs (CX-000359-05A1), and National
Institute of Mental Health Grant 24600.
1. Tulving E (1985) Memory and consciousness. Can Psychol 26(1):1–12.
2. Rosenbaum RS, et al. (2005) The case of K.C.: Contributions of a memory-impaired
person to memory theory. Neuropsychologia 43(7):989–1021.
3. Kopelman MD, Bright P (2012) On remembering and forgetting our autobiographical
pasts: Retrograde amnesia and Andrew Mayes’s contribution to neuropsychological
method. Neuropsychologia 50(13):2961–2972.
4. Moscovitch M, Nadel L, Winocur G, Gilboa A, Rosenbaum RS (2006) The cognitive
neuroscience of remote episodic, semantic and spatial memory. Curr Opin Neurobiol
16(2):179–190.
5. Bayley PJ, Hopkins RO, Squire LR (2003) Successful recollection of remote autobiographical
memories by amnesic patients with medial temporal lobe lesions. Neuron 38(1):135–144.
6. Squire LR (1992) Memory and the hippocampus: A synthesis from findings with rats,
monkeys, and humans. Psychol Rev 99(2):195–231.
7. Winocur G, Moscovitch M (2011) Memory transformation and systems consolidation.
J Int Neuropsychol Soc 17(5):766–780.
8. Mullally SL, Intraub H, Maguire EA (2012) Attenuated boundary extension produces a
paradoxical memory advantage in amnesic patients. Curr Biol 22(4):261–268.
9. Damasio AR, Eslinger PJ, Damasio H, Van Hoesen GW, Cornell S (1985) Multimodal
amnesic syndrome following bilateral temporal and basal forebrain damage. Arch
Neurol 42(3):252–259.
10. Warrington EK, McCarthy RA (1988) The fractionation of retrograde amnesia. Brain
Cogn 7(2):184–200.
11. Bayley PJ, Gold JJ, Hopkins RO, Squire LR (2005) The neuroanatomy of remote
memory. Neuron 46(5):799–810.
12. McCarthy RA, Kopelman MD, Warrington EK (2005) Remembering and forgetting of semantic knowledge in amnesia: A 16-year follow-up investigation of RFR. Neuropsychologia
43(3):356–372.
13. Rempel-Clower NL, Zola SM, Squire LR, Amaral DG (1996) Three cases of enduring
memory impairment after bilateral damage limited to the hippocampal formation.
J Neurosci 16(16):5233–5255.
14. Jeneson A, Squire LR (2011) Working memory, long-term memory, and medial temporal lobe function. Learn Mem 19(1):15–25.
15. Fortin NJ, Agster KL, Eichenbaum HB (2002) Critical role of the hippocampus in
memory for sequences of events. Nat Neurosci 5(5):458–462.
16. Insausti R, et al. (1998) MR volumetric analysis of the human entorhinal, perirhinal,
and temporopolar cortices. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 19(4):659–671.
17. Frankó E, Insausti AM, Artacho-Pérula E, Insausti R, Chavoix C (2014) Identification of
the human medial temporal lobe regions on magnetic resonance images. Hum Brain
Mapp 35(1):248–256.
18. Bayley PJ, Frascino JC, Squire LR (2005) Robust habit learning in the absence of
awareness and independent of the medial temporal lobe. Nature 436(7050):550–553.
19. Knutson AR, Hopkins RO, Squire LR (2013) A pencil rescues impaired performance on
a visual discrimination task in patients with medial temporal lobe lesions. Learn Mem
20(11):607–610.
20. Kirwan CB, Bayley PJ, Galván VV, Squire LR (2008) Detailed recollection of remote
autobiographical memory after damage to the medial temporal lobe. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 105(7):2676–2680.
21. Levine B, Svoboda E, Hay JF, Winocur G, Moscovitch M (2002) Aging and autobiographical memory: Dissociating episodic from semantic retrieval. Psychol Aging 17(4):
677–689.
22. Hassabis D, Kumaran D, Vann SD, Maguire EA (2007) Patients with hippocampal amnesia cannot imagine new experiences. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104(5):
1726–1731.
23. Race E, Keane MM, Verfaellie M (2011) Medial temporal lobe damage causes deficits
in episodic memory and episodic future thinking not attributable to deficits in narrative construction. J Neurosci 31(28):10262–10269.
24. Dede AJO, Wixted J, Hopkins RO, Squire LR (2016) Autobiographical memory,
future imagining, and the medial temporal lobe. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113:
13474–13479.
Dede et al. PNAS | November 22, 2016 | vol. 113 | no. 47 | 13485
NEUROSCIENCE PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES